[Amit Varma]: Here's a fundamental value of mine that shapes the way I look at the world. I believe that
[Amit Varma]: two consenting adults should be able to interact with each other in any way they want as long
[Amit Varma]: as they're not infringing on the rights of anyone else. As long as there is consent and
[Amit Varma]: it's not harming anyone, it's morally wrong to get in their way. Now this holds true in
[Amit Varma]: any context. This interaction could be in the bedroom or in the marketplace. And yet
[Amit Varma]: you will find people of different ideologies that will oppose such freedom in one domain
[Amit Varma]: or the other. Some want to clamp down on personal freedoms, invoking shady notions of collective
[Amit Varma]: morality. Some want to clamp down on economic freedoms. All of these restrictions are morally
[Amit Varma]: wrong. And not only are they morally wrong, they lead to terrible consequences. Societies
[Amit Varma]: grow and prosper through the free exchange of ideas. Equally, societies grow and prosper
[Amit Varma]: through the free exchange of goods and services. That is why voluntary interaction is so amazing.
[Amit Varma]: It leaves both people better off. I like to invoke a phrase coined by the writer John
[Amit Varma]: Stossel for this, the double thank you moment. Let's say you go to a cafe to buy a cup of
[Amit Varma]: coffee. When you hand over the money, the cashier says thank you. When you receive your
[Amit Varma]: coffee, you say thank you. You value the coffee more than the money. It's the other way around
[Amit Varma]: for the cafe. Both of you are better off. This is magic. This is the secret of economic
[Amit Varma]: growth. Across the world, societies became prosperous when people started interacting
[Amit Varma]: in such positive some ways. There's a direct correlation between the degree of economic
[Amit Varma]: freedom and the rate of growth anywhere. This is why after millennia of not much happening,
[Amit Varma]: millennia of pretty much everybody being poor, the last two centuries have lifted our standards
[Amit Varma]: of living so much. Globalization, trade, consenting adults. Despite this, markets often get a
[Amit Varma]: bad rap. Here are a few reasons for this. One, it is intuitive for us to think of the
[Amit Varma]: world in zero-sum ways. If someone is getting richer, we assume it has to be at the expense
[Amit Varma]: of someone else. But this is not true. All voluntary interaction is a win-win game. Two,
[Amit Varma]: we confuse cronyism for free markets, while they are opposite things. In a free market,
[Amit Varma]: the state looks after the rule of law and there are no barriers to entry. Competition
[Amit Varma]: benefits everyone. But big companies often lobby the state, even purchase the state,
[Amit Varma]: to get coercive laws made that restrict competition, protect their own incompetence and harm consumers
[Amit Varma]: and citizens. This creates the opposite of a free market. But people often mistake this
[Amit Varma]: for markets themselves. Three, through history, including our own history in India, we have
[Amit Varma]: seen rapacious companies get together with a coercive state that has a monopoly on violence
[Amit Varma]: to exploit the people. This is exactly what the East India Company did and it causes an
[Amit Varma]: irrational distrust of markets, while it should really cause a rational skepticism of state
[Amit Varma]: power. Four, some of us are entranced by an engineering mindset, the notion that we are
[Amit Varma]: smart enough to design the world from the top down. This is what Frederick Hayek called
[Amit Varma]: the fatal conceit. And it is, of course, a fallacy. Five, there are ideologies that build
[Amit Varma]: a narrative of compassion around themselves and rely on using state power to suppress
[Amit Varma]: individual rights, whether in the bedroom or the marketplace. And these are often couched
[Amit Varma]: in good intentions. These good intentions are seen. The terrible consequences of the
[Amit Varma]: coercion they involve are unseen. So we need to be clear-eyed about this. At both a moral
[Amit Varma]: and consequential level, freedom is good in every domain. And that is why India's liberalisation
[Amit Varma]: of 1991 was such a big deal. It increased our economic freedom, empowered individuals
[Amit Varma]: and lifted millions of people out of poverty. It was a humanitarian miracle.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. 30 years ago, India lifted many restrictions on private
[Amit Varma]: enterprise, which brought over a quarter of a billion people out of poverty. But the reforms
[Amit Varma]: could have gone further, and the momentum eventually ended. Between 1991 and 2011, we
[Amit Varma]: had a golden period. Since then, we are on a downward trajectory. What makes it worse
[Amit Varma]: is that over 60% of India is born after that liberalisation. So though they reap the benefits
[Amit Varma]: of those reforms, they don't realise what a big deal they were. They don't have a memory
[Amit Varma]: of the times before those reforms. In some cases, they even idealise the ideologies that
[Amit Varma]: kept us poor for decades and caused so much suffering. They look only at the intentions
[Amit Varma]: and not the outcomes. In an attempt to correct that, the Mercator Centre at George Mason
[Amit Varma]: University, led by my friend and frequent guest Shruti Rajgopalan, have started something
[Amit Varma]: called the 1991 Project at the 1991project.com. I encourage you to head on over and check
[Amit Varma]: that out. I invited Shruti to speak about those reforms, as well as another of my favourite
[Amit Varma]: economists and frequent guests, Ajay Shah. Ajay has done brilliant, lucid episodes with
[Amit Varma]: me this year on the farm laws as well as the economics of vaccination. And I'll link both
[Amit Varma]: of those from the show notes. He's also been an inside player within government for many
[Amit Varma]: of these years, and knows all the protagonists involved. When I invited them here, my intention
[Amit Varma]: was not just to talk about the 91 reforms per se, but also the India of the four decades
[Amit Varma]: before that. Why did we go in the direction we went in? What were the consequences? What
[Amit Varma]: was life like before 1991? And all three of us are old enough to remember some of that.
[Amit Varma]: We got historical, we also got meta. And we had a digressive conversation, which was so
[Amit Varma]: much fun. Before we get there, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. Also check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you master
[Amit Varma]: social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500 if you use
[Amit Varma]: the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use
[Amit Varma]: the code UNSEEN. Up level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti and Ajay, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest 2]: We're very happy to be here.
[Amit Varma]: We are very happy to be here. Thanks for having us.
[Amit Varma]: Actually we should have rehearsed this before so we could have figured out which one of
[Amit Varma]: you gets to react first. But you're both happy to be here now that we've kind of established
[Amit Varma]: that. What I'm not going to do during this episode is the usual drill I do with new guests
[Amit Varma]: about what has your life been like? What are your intellectual influences? Where did you
[Amit Varma]: go to school? What did you eat for dinner when you were eight years old? Because we,
[Amit Varma]: you know, both of you are familiar to my listeners by now being such frequent guests. So instead,
[Amit Varma]: why don't we start by talking about, say, your life in the 80s, or your life growing
[Amit Varma]: up rather by 80s, I'm just thinking of my own childhood, but your life kind of growing
[Amit Varma]: up because the fulcrum of this episode in a sense is the 91 reform. So obviously, it's
[Amit Varma]: not as if everything happened at that fixed point in time, something's happened before
[Amit Varma]: something's happened later. But I find that today, you know, given that more than 60%
[Amit Varma]: of India is born after 91 doesn't really have a sense of what life was like before that.
[Amit Varma]: And often have this really idealized view of, you know, what India was like before that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I'll chip in as well with what little memories I have, though I was, you
[Amit Varma]: know, relatively incredibly privileged in those times. But Shruti, why don't we start
[Amit Varma]: with you? Because in your wonderful essay on the part of the 91 project, one of the
[Amit Varma]: things I liked about that essay was that you brought the personal in also, where you speak
[Amit Varma]: about what life was like in the 70s and 80s, and what your grandmother would do differently
[Amit Varma]: and what your mother would do differently today and all of that. So give me a sense
[Amit Varma]: of what life was like back then.
[Guest 1]: So you know, I was incredibly young when the reform moment happened. But for most of us,
[Guest 1]: like anyone's childhood memories, you only know what you see around you. So it's not
[Guest 1]: like when I was a kid, and I was growing up in like, you know, mostly socialism, very
[Guest 1]: few goods and, you know, variety in goods in terms of consumer goods, right. So, you
[Guest 1]: know, very much grew up in the two brands of chocolate, two kinds of cola drinks sort
[Guest 1]: of world, right. And it wasn't unusual, simply because we didn't know better. It wasn't like
[Guest 1]: we were privy to this whole other world out there, where there were these amazing things
[Guest 1]: that were available. So for me, two things happened simultaneously. Somewhere around
[Guest 1]: 1991-92, my parents had to go abroad for a stint. And they were real troopers, they took
[Guest 1]: me and my sister, they kind of like more than troopers, I think they were a little bit crazy.
[Guest 1]: They just yanked me and my sister out of school. And they said that you learn more traveling
[Guest 1]: across Europe. So you know, just come along with us. So we basically didn't go to school
[Guest 1]: for more than half a year. And my mother's a musician. So we sort of traveled with her.
[Guest 1]: And it was really the first brush with markets, right? And the idea was all the myths that
[Guest 1]: we read in our textbook was India is poor, India is overpopulated. There are too many
[Guest 1]: people trying to go for too few goods and things like that. But one of the stark things
[Guest 1]: you realize when you're in Europe is that the places you enjoy the most are the places
[Guest 1]: that are crowded, right? And the places that are not crowded that have too few people,
[Guest 1]: they are rich, they have things, but the stores close at four in the evening, right? Nothing
[Guest 1]: is that easily available. Even the streets are sometimes not lit in some of these, you
[Guest 1]: know, Dutch villages and things like that kind of feels pretty off. And the really big
[Guest 1]: cities which are noisy and polluted. And you know, when you go to London or you go to Vienna,
[Guest 1]: those are the incredible places. So you know, one thing became very clear that there's something
[Guest 1]: about this overpopulation thing, which is very off that I, you know, kind of viscerally
[Guest 1]: figured out that I seem to like these places. The other was just that there are possibilities
[Guest 1]: of things that are available when you go to a store, right? You just go to the supermarket
[Guest 1]: and it's no longer two types of things. My mother spent our entire childhood, my sister
[Guest 1]: and I have identical clothes because my mother bought cloth, took it to the tailor and got
[Guest 1]: it stitched. And when you're very young, there's too much leftover cloths. You're basically
[Guest 1]: making, you know, both kids wear identical clothes. Our childhood pictures are ridiculous
[Guest 1]: and will never be revealed. So those are sort of the biggest memories. Now I have a very
[Guest 1]: different point of view when I look back at my childhood, because now I'm a professional
[Guest 1]: economist, right? So now when I look back at my childhood, I'm not just looking at it
[Guest 1]: from the point of view of what my mom did or my grandmother did. I have an analytical
[Guest 1]: framework I can impose and now understand why this was happening. So for instance, my
[Guest 1]: grandmother used to spend pretty much every day in the afternoon, like post lunch and
[Guest 1]: before dinner, she would go through all the rice, dal, wheat, and, you know, kind of separate
[Guest 1]: the kankad. You know, there's a kankad and pathar. That's how many there would be, right?
[Guest 1]: Another instance is we would not buy atta in a packet. Okay. We would actually get the
[Guest 1]: wheat. My grandmother would do the separation thing and we would take it to the chakki.
[Guest 1]: Okay. And we would be allowed inside the chakki where they would watch and make sure that
[Guest 1]: nothing is adulterated, right? Nothing is mixed into the atta and it's really pure.
[Guest 1]: These are very strange things to do. Okay. If you think about it, it means you basically
[Guest 1]: don't trust branding, right? You don't trust the reputation of any good. There is too much
[Guest 1]: adulteration in the market, right? And now when I look back, I'm like, oh, I understand why there
[Guest 1]: was so much rampant adulteration in the market. It's because prices are controlled because
[Guest 1]: of the Essential Commodities Act and, you know, everything that follows. And now you
[Guest 1]: get everything at a very specific control price at the ration shop. So there are two
[Guest 1]: ways of doing this. Either the ration shop people just, you know, kind of escape and
[Guest 1]: they just siphon off all the wheat to the black market and they try to make a killing.
[Guest 1]: But still, there are going to be people standing outside the ration shop and protest, right?
[Guest 1]: So you've got to give them something. So what is a way to both siphon off some of the wheat
[Guest 1]: and rice and dal while also serving the poor notionally? It's just you mix it with, you
[Guest 1]: know, all this other pathar and kankar until it reaches a weight where the market price
[Guest 1]: will compensate whatever the control price is, right? Because now you've mixed it in
[Guest 1]: and the weight has increased. So these were the sorts of things that were going on. Of
[Guest 1]: course, as a 7-8 year old, I have no idea that, you know, there's this entire socialist
[Guest 1]: political economy at play. It was more that this is just how life is. The sort of like
[Guest 1]: aha moment really came, I think, maybe starting 1992-93. You get this big shift in consumer
[Guest 1]: goods, you know, and some of it is pre-1991. Like, you know, Pepsi, drinking Pepsi was
[Guest 1]: like a major thing in our life. My sister loved Michael Jackson. Michael Jackson drinks
[Guest 1]: Pepsi. Pepsi must be amazing because Michael Jackson is amazing and all the other things
[Guest 1]: that follow. But Pepsi actually came to India a few years before because of various, you
[Guest 1]: know, deals that the government was literally trying to woo the company to come back and
[Guest 1]: set up plant and things like that. So some of this was already in motion. But by 1992-93,
[Guest 1]: you suddenly started seeing a lot more things. The second was you could finally import stuff,
[Guest 1]: right? So you could get like a like a VHS recorder fairly easily or a CD player fairly
[Guest 1]: easily, even if you couldn't get like CDs easily from a library. Those sorts of things
[Guest 1]: started becoming very common quickly in my childhood. And I remember that, you know,
[Guest 1]: that moment being quite stark because we had just seen all these amazing, you know, variety
[Guest 1]: of goods. When we went abroad, we came back to India. And within a matter of three, four
[Guest 1]: years, you started getting the same things. And of course, you know, all the usual stuff.
[Guest 1]: I think we already managed to get a gas connection and a phone connection pre-liberalization.
[Guest 1]: But I remember it taking a long time. Right. So when the cell phone revolution happened
[Guest 1]: much later, when I was in college, that was sort of like a like an incredible thing. So
[Guest 1]: some of this is like lived experience. Some of it is just when I look at childhood pictures
[Guest 1]: and I try and understand what the hell is going on in my household, I look at it as
[Guest 1]: a grown economist. And that's the way I make sense of my my childhood. So my memory can
[Amit Varma]: be a little bit faulty on this. Yeah, I can I can imagine you asking your mother that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, why did me and my sister always wear the same clothes? And she's like, you are
[Amit Varma]: an economist, you figure it out. And I'm really glad you brought up that overpopulation point
[Amit Varma]: because that's still a bogey that is being banded around. You know, we were taught in
[Amit Varma]: our textbooks that India's problem is too many people. I mean, India's problem is really
[Amit Varma]: bad governance, not too many people. You know, too many people is a great thing. People are
[Amit Varma]: brains, not stomachs, their resources. And that's why in all of human history, what you
[Amit Varma]: see is a migration from places with less population density to places with more population density.
[Amit Varma]: That is why we go to cities. However much we may idealize village life, I don't think
[Amit Varma]: most of the listeners of this episode for that matter, are you know, living in say villages
[Amit Varma]: or whatever population is great, people are great. And every time a politician tells you
[Amit Varma]: population is a problem, the politician is telling you you are the problem. That's again
[Amit Varma]: kind of resonant because with me in the 80s, because I was of course, a son of an IAS officer.
[Amit Varma]: So things like you know, I didn't have a scarcity of a telephone at home. But you know, as you
[Amit Varma]: were speaking, I just remembered an interesting incident when I was in the 11th standard,
[Amit Varma]: which would be in the late 1980s. A girl who was my classmate in college just rang the
[Amit Varma]: bell outside and I opened the door and she said, Hi, I was just passing by and I need
[Amit Varma]: to make an urgent phone call. Can I use your phone, please? I know you have a phone. So
[Amit Varma]: I said, Okay, so she came in, she made a phone call, and then she went off. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: I was pretty clueless and perhaps still am. So it took me many years to figure out that
[Amit Varma]: the purpose of her visit wasn't necessarily the phone call. But that's how scarcities
[Amit Varma]: were. It would take you five years, 10 years on a waiting list to get a phone. You know,
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode with Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley, who writes that fantastic newsletter with
[Amit Varma]: Pranay Kutasane. And the episode was titled Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley's father's scooter.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned scooters in your essay where you point out that a second hand scooter actually
[Amit Varma]: cost more than a new scooter because a new scooter would take 10 years to come and I
[Amit Varma]: want to read out this lovely para from your piece where you write quote, is this the first
[Amit Varma]: time I'm quoting you at yourself in the show? Well, okay, it's very freaky, probably. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So you're right, quote, it got so bad that when a girl child was born, well wishers would
[Amit Varma]: only half in jest, suggest to the parents that they should immediately book a scooter,
[Amit Varma]: so it would arrive in time for the wedding. This was reminiscent of the old Soviet Union
[Amit Varma]: joke about a man paying for an automobile. The clerk tells him it will be delivered in
[Amit Varma]: 10 years. The man asked morning or afternoon, what difference does it make response a clerk?
[Amit Varma]: Well, the plumber is coming in the morning, stop good. And it was kind of the same with
[Amit Varma]: everything, not just phones. Like, you know, another thing I remember was that back in
[Amit Varma]: those days, it was a very, very big deal if someone went abroad to study, right? It was
[Amit Varma]: a huge deal. You know, you had to be the elite among the elite for that to happen. While
[Amit Varma]: today that is so commonplace. The opportunities are just insane. You know, an airline flight,
[Amit Varma]: even for a privileged kid like me was such a big deal. flights were so expensive. And
[Amit Varma]: like I remember looking at the prices 15 years later and realizing that they are the same,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and obviously inflation had happened. And in real terms, they were way, way cheaper.
[Amit Varma]: And when that opened up like today, you know, smartphones even are so affordable, so many
[Amit Varma]: more people can fly. And again, I remember what a struggle it was to get the books you
[Amit Varma]: wanted the movies you wanted. I remember in fact, when satellite television came something
[Amit Varma]: that you mentioned, just watching star movies or whatever the equivalent was in freaking
[Amit Varma]: bewilderment that they are showing movies all day. I don't have to wait for that once
[Amit Varma]: a week when Doordarshan will show something all day. I can watch seven movies a day. It
[Amit Varma]: was mind blowing. But before I kind of forget, yeah, go ahead.
[Guest 1]: I want to add something to the to the Bajaj thing. You know, the actually the Soviet Union
[Guest 1]: joke Alex told me Alex Davrok told me that joke and I have appropriated it. So you know,
[Guest 1]: the Bajaj thing, there are like, I just want to unpeel that because it's a good example
[Guest 1]: of what was going on and why it was happening. Right. So on the one hand, you're like, oh,
[Guest 1]: you had to wait a long time to get a Bajaj scooter. Right. Now, that seems a little bit
[Guest 1]: like what's happening right now during the pandemic. I just moved homes. I ordered some
[Guest 1]: furniture and because of all the supply chain, you know, complications, it's going to take
[Guest 1]: like six weeks for some very basic furniture to show up. But that's not the reason that
[Guest 1]: it was delayed. It wasn't like a pandemic or something like that. It was more endemic
[Guest 1]: than that. And the reason is that the original command and control system, they thought that
[Guest 1]: all the means of production, right, all your typical iron, steel, these sorts of things,
[Guest 1]: they're very scarce. Right. We need to make sure that these things are used well and not
[Guest 1]: wasted. And the way we ensure that it's used well in a closed economy where people can't
[Guest 1]: just go to global markets to just buy as much steel as they want is to ensure that the government
[Guest 1]: allows people based on priority on what they can and cannot produce. Right. So there's
[Guest 1]: an order of priority list on who can use what kind of steel. Now, once you make this kind
[Guest 1]: of five year plan document, which we can talk about in detail, and it's fairly complicated
[Guest 1]: to make this and you still get it terribly, terribly wrong, it can't be done. But let's
[Guest 1]: say that you attempt this kind of five year plan document. You still need to figure out
[Guest 1]: that, hey, I have X tons of steel that we're producing in the country. And now what are
[Guest 1]: the priority sectors? OK, so they'll have an order of priority. You know, some of it
[Guest 1]: has to go to heavy machinery, blah, blah, blah. Now, scooters and Vespas is somewhere
[Guest 1]: in the list of priority, right? Godrej, Almera is somewhere in that list of priorities. So
[Guest 1]: you keep going down bicycles, spectacles, whatever. The thing is, they realize somewhere
[Guest 1]: down the line that people actually want more scooters than you think they should want.
[Guest 1]: Right. That's what's really going on. Right. So all these young men who are now, you know,
[Guest 1]: in the 70s with like an explosion in population growth, these young men, why do they want
[Guest 1]: these scooters? So now Bajaj says, but they want them. So what do we do? And, you know,
[Guest 1]: Rahul Bajaj just talked about this. He keeps going back to the Ministry of Commerce and
[Guest 1]: industry and saying, I want an expansion permit because lots of people want scooters. Now,
[Guest 1]: what normally happens when you limit the number of scooters that can be produced, but more
[Guest 1]: people want it. Right. The price of scooters will go up. But when you're in a socialist
[Guest 1]: economy, you cannot allow Rahul Bajaj to profit from the system you put in place in the first
[Guest 1]: place. Right. To make sure that resources are used appropriately and they're not wasted
[Guest 1]: and so on and so forth, which means now not only will Rahul Bajaj have a limit or a restriction
[Guest 1]: on where he can set up his firm, how much he can produce, how much steel input he can
[Guest 1]: use, how many workers he is allowed to have on the factory floor versus in the sales department.
[Guest 1]: These are times where if you had to shift someone from the sales office to the front
[Guest 1]: office or the factory floor, you needed to go back to the government, get permission
[Guest 1]: and come back and make the switch. Right. These kinds of times. So not only do we have
[Guest 1]: to do that, now we also have to control the consumer end. Right. People want this too
[Guest 1]: much and they're going to drive the price up because they're stupid. They want these
[Guest 1]: Vespa Bajaj Vespas. They shouldn't want them. So now how do we control the price? We put
[Guest 1]: in price controls. So now an automatic consequence of price controls and not being allowed to
[Guest 1]: expand supply because you have these expansion permits which are required is you're going
[Guest 1]: to have quantity demanded far exceeds quantity supplied. There's a very classic shortage.
[Guest 1]: You can have long lines. Right. Sometimes. And in this instance, the long lines is replaced
[Guest 1]: by other things. So one of them is just time preference. Right. So the point that you were
[Guest 1]: talking about, which is a second hand scooter today is more valuable than a first hand scooter
[Guest 1]: 10 years from today, because now I can have it today. But it also pops up in this marriage
[Guest 1]: example because if you talk, I'm too young for this. So maybe I'm going to anytime I
[Guest 1]: want to make like old people jokes, I'm just going to dump it on you guys. But Godrej Almera's
[Guest 1]: right Bajaj scooters are all number one dowry demands. Right. Because that is a moment when
[Guest 1]: you really know someone will go a very long way to skip the line. Right. So Bajaj scooters
[Guest 1]: are not mostly being driven by men, not so many by women, but it's always the bride's
[Guest 1]: father who's like struggling to get these things. So there are about six kinds of socialist
[Guest 1]: command and control problems going on for this joke to become so endemic to Indian life.
[Guest 1]: Right. So it's not just any shortage, because Indians also face all sorts of shortages.
[Guest 1]: Sometimes you have to wait in a long line to get an iPhone. This is not that kind of
[Guest 1]: shortage. I just want to make that clear, because I don't think this is the sort of
[Guest 1]: shortage that most Indians modern day in modern day life have experienced.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. So, Ajay, you've been silent all this while, though not silent all these years.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me what was life like for you kind of growing up in India, I'm guessing that
[Amit Varma]: there were a lot of things which were normalized, which felt normal. And over a period of time,
[Amit Varma]: you actually start as you know, as you become an economist, you apply your frame to it and
[Amit Varma]: you kind of figure out, you begin to break it down and understand exactly what was going
[Amit Varma]: on. But, you know, give me a glimpse of sort of what it was like for you in the 70s and
[Guest 2]: 80s.
[Guest 2]: So I grew up in the 70s. And some of my more interesting memories from that period are
[Guest 2]: my sisters and I would venture out in the morning to stand in line for the rationed
[Guest 2]: access to milk and bread and butter and cheese. There were long queues. And so it was efficient
[Guest 2]: for parents to have multiple children because you could parallel process on those queues.
[Guest 2]: And it just seems unbelievable that there should be shortages of milk, of bread, of
[Guest 2]: butter and of cheese. But that's the way it was. These things were just not available.
[Guest 2]: I remember pervasive lack of access to books and music and so on. So getting books was
[Guest 2]: a big deal. I mean, I grew up in a house with 6000 books, but each of those books was a
[Guest 2]: treasure and it was like a sustained long range project that we're going to get this
[Guest 2]: book and it would be like a big task before we would get this book.
[Guest 2]: I was at the Hostel 3 at IIT Bombay in 1983 and we had an LP of The Dark Side of the Moon
[Guest 2]: by Pink Floyd and nothing else. Why? Because that was the only LP that was released by
[Guest 2]: HMV in India. There was no other Pink Floyd content. So Susan Thomas got Wish You Were
[Guest 2]: Here from Kuwait and that was like our first precious LP which could play Wish You Were
[Guest 2]: Here. So it was a strange world. It was a funny experience growing up through all that.
[Guest 2]: My father was an economist and, for example, we got to read Milton Friedman's Free to
[Guest 2]: Choose in 1976. So we were very much aware of that intellectual discussion around how
[Guest 2]: this whole thing is broken. So we could rage against an incomprehensibly stupid system,
[Guest 2]: but we also lived in it. I also remember, I first went abroad to do my PhD. This was
[Guest 2]: in 1987. And I vividly remember that in Los Angeles in 1987, for the first time in my
[Guest 2]: life, I saw a highway. For the first time in my life, I saw a CD player. For the first
[Guest 2]: time in my life, I heard a CD. These were things that didn't exist in India.
[Amit Varma]: Magnificent. You know, before we talk about 91, I really do want to talk about 1947 as
[Amit Varma]: well. You know, it seems necessary. It wasn't that, you know, you had a bunch of policies
[Amit Varma]: put in place by one person. And, you know, and it was an accident and historical accident
[Amit Varma]: and we suffered for that reason. And then eventually we overturned some of the policies
[Amit Varma]: and things get better. It was much more than that. There was a certain way of thinking
[Amit Varma]: that was pervasive in those times. And before we actually get down to talking about the
[Amit Varma]: ways of thinking, especially of, you know, Nehru and his influences and so on, a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a counterfactual question, because if you look at the leaders of that time, you actually
[Amit Varma]: see different ideologies. It is not necessarily the case that it is inevitable that India
[Amit Varma]: would have set upon this path. You know, you had people like Raj Gopalachari and Patel
[Amit Varma]: who were of a more liberal bent as far as markets were concerned. And you also had people
[Amit Varma]: who were far more to the left than, say, Nehru himself was. So on one hand, it is a popular
[Amit Varma]: and largely correct notion that Nehru was a creature of his times. This was the temper
[Amit Varma]: of the times. Nobody at that time knew the reality of the Soviet Union. It was natural
[Amit Varma]: to kind of admire them for what they did. And Friedman hadn't written his books. Hayek
[Amit Varma]: was an obscure economist somewhere. But on the other hand, it's also kind of true that
[Amit Varma]: there were other directions we could have taken. And this is not just in terms of economics.
[Amit Varma]: It's also just in terms of so much else, the direction our politics took, the constitution
[Amit Varma]: that we came up with, all of that. So when you look back on that period in history, is
[Amit Varma]: there a sense of perhaps an opportunity lost? Is there a sense that, hey, it could have
[Amit Varma]: been worse? Like one point so many people make is that the fact that India stayed together,
[Amit Varma]: that the center held, is itself a kind of a miracle because many such previous experiments
[Amit Varma]: just fell apart after colonialism was defeated. So what's kind of your sense of that, Ajay?
[Guest 2]: I'm closer to the position that if you and I had been co-pilots with Nehru standing in
[Guest 2]: the 20s and 30s and 40s, we would have been closer to those positions. So let's look at
[Guest 2]: that world. At that time, the argument would be made that, look, the Great Depression showed
[Guest 2]: that the simple application of free markets doesn't work so well. Folks like John Maynard
[Guest 2]: Keynes were very keen to protect some basic decency and liberal democracy because as they
[Guest 2]: saw it, the alternative was to collapse into national socialism in Germany or communism
[Guest 2]: in Russia. So the idea was that the only way to stave off the barbarians was to give up
[Guest 2]: some of our economic freedom. Then when you look from the viewpoint of people in India,
[Guest 2]: of the dreamers for India, there is no question that there was a remarkable economic development
[Guest 2]: project which took place in Japan after the Meiji Restoration and in Soviet Russia after
[Guest 2]: the Russian Revolution. So people like Nehru dreamed that we don't have to take 400 years
[Guest 2]: to do this. Can we do this in 40 years? And Nehru often talked about this tension that
[Guest 2]: you wanted the decency of British liberal democracy, but at the same time, you want
[Guest 2]: to match British quality prosperity within 40 years, within 50 years, within 60 years.
[Guest 2]: So they felt that state mobilization and the quaint term used by development economics,
[Guest 2]: which is a developmental state, was the way to do it. One more piece I want to add to
[Guest 2]: that is the Second World War. During the Second World War, all over the world, governments
[Guest 2]: commandeered the economy. They normalized oppression because all parts of the economy
[Guest 2]: were taken over by the government. I want to say in passing, there is a bit of that
[Guest 2]: going on with COVID-19. War powers is a huge problem because it normalizes state control.
[Guest 2]: I have increasingly grown to think that by default, we tend to sink into oppression.
[Guest 2]: It takes a tremendous effort by a people, by an intelligentsia, to claw back freedom.
[Guest 2]: That state oppression is the norm and freedom is the exception. And around the time of the
[Guest 2]: Second World War, all over the world, state domination was the norm and not the exception.
[Guest 2]: Look at the UK, look at the US. They had price controls all the way to the 70s. If you read
[Guest 2]: about Australia all the way to the early 80s, it sounds like the stupidity of Indian public
[Guest 2]: policy. So it took many years for the world to wake up and say, no, that's not the story
[Guest 2]: that makes sense. So I'm reasonably sympathetic to the kind of arguments and the debates that
[Guest 2]: took place in that period that led to a certain outcome. I envy a country like Taiwan, a country
[Guest 2]: like South Korea that chose to walk a different path. I admire the people who did that, who
[Guest 2]: led that. My reading of that period is that that was an exception and I fear that if the
[Guest 2]: three of us were put in that place, in that time, in that consciousness, with that sense
[Guest 2]: of the dream for India, that we can do this rapidly. I'm much more of a conservative today
[Guest 2]: in the sense that you let the world evolve organically. At that time, it was much more
[Guest 2]: fashionable to think that a developmentalist state will take a country by the scruff of
[Guest 2]: the neck, will remake a country, will make a new man. There was all this dreaming about
[Guest 2]: the power of a state to reshape a society. So I'm sympathetic to what those guys did
[Guest 2]: while recognizing in hindsight that those decisions were awful for the country.
[Guest 1]: I would add a couple of things to this and go even a little farther back in history than
[Guest 1]: what Ajay just said. You know, when you started Amit, you asked if this was like a foregone
[Guest 1]: conclusion, right? If India was just predestined to do this. So some of it is, of course, there
[Guest 1]: is an entire structure of war controls in place. You know, Nehru becomes the successor
[Guest 1]: and he's very enamored by socialists and there's that going on. But I think if you go back
[Guest 1]: maybe 50 years, 60 years before Nehru, you start seeing the big change happening, right?
[Guest 1]: So if you look at the Indian intellectuals of that time, you see the old guard, which
[Guest 1]: is, you know, Nauroji and you see Hume and you see, you know, Feroz Shah Mehta, right?
[Guest 1]: All Gokhale, right? All these people, they are liberals somewhere influenced somewhere
[Guest 1]: between, you know, Scottish enlightenment and like sort of Burkean conservatism, right?
[Guest 1]: That's kind of where they are. But their experience, and this I have learned from studying, especially
[Guest 1]: Nauroji, is number one, that the British government, while they might pretend to be laissez-faire,
[Guest 1]: it's really a mercantilist economy. It's not really functioning like a laissez-faire economy.
[Guest 1]: And second, when it comes to India, it is acting as an extractive state, right? It's
[Guest 1]: a predatory state. So they're literally just, you know, stealing resources from India. They
[Guest 1]: are burdening, they are taxing. It's not like India is, you know, gloriful free trade internal
[Guest 1]: network at that time. When they start lecturing on these things, the only allies that Nauroji
[Guest 1]: finds is the Fabians, right? So when he goes abroad, though he's standing for elections
[Guest 1]: in the Liberal Party, and this is William Gladstone's Liberal Party, it's not any willy-nilly,
[Guest 1]: you know, aaj ka Liberal Party. But the people who support Nauroji to even win the seat is
[Guest 1]: the Social Democratic Federation, right? Like George Bernard Shaw says, I'm so glad the
[Guest 1]: SDF went Fabian and supported the Fabian candidate, who, by the way, is Dadavai Nauroji, right?
[Guest 1]: So the Fabian connection to Indian nationalist movement goes back about 50 years before Nehru.
[Guest 1]: Nehru is a consequence of that. It's not that Lasky and George Bernard Shaw just whispered
[Guest 1]: something in Nehru's ear and wow, he became Fabian, right? Some of this is, you know,
[Guest 1]: by then, John Maynard Keynes has already written the obituary of laissez-faire. It's called
[Guest 1]: the end of laissez-faire, right? His essay. And you can see there's the shift going on,
[Guest 1]: right? So there is progressivism in the US, there is fascism, Nazism in Europe, there
[Guest 1]: is full-blown, you know, command and control socialism happening in the Soviet. So, I mean,
[Guest 1]: the whole world is going in a particular direction. So that's part one. And there are very few
[Guest 1]: naysayers, okay? Hayek is not obscure at that time. Just FYI. Okay, he's already written
[Guest 1]: his, done his work on capital theory. He's taken on John Maynard Keynes. He's like the
[Amit Varma]: world's most famous economist. I think for non-economists, he's kind of obscure. Actually,
[Guest 1]: for non-economists of that time, he's not. I'll tell you why. Because when he writes
[Guest 1]: The Road to Serfdom. That's 1945 or something, right? 44, yeah. Yeah, it's, but you know,
[Guest 1]: I mean, the Reader's Digest does a miniature version of it, like which, you know, major
[Guest 1]: economist writing major books today is appearing the next day in Times of India or Stardust
[Guest 1]: or, you know what I mean? So what I mean is that they had more connection to the intellectuals
[Guest 1]: than we imagine now. But leaving that aside, so, you know, B.K. Nehru says that all the
[Guest 1]: people who were interested in the Indian nationalist movement went to LSE because LSE supported,
[Guest 1]: you know, Indian freedom. Why did LSE support it? Because the Fabians were so close to British
[Guest 1]: Labour Party. The Labour Party was more pro-Indian independence versus the Tories. So there is
[Guest 1]: like a deep linkage here, which is at the time India got independence, given that it
[Guest 1]: was the Labour Party in power. Right. And given that there were war controls and it's
[Guest 1]: actually Nehru who succeeded, you know, it's almost predestined we're going to be Fabian.
[Guest 1]: But the second part is because this was going on, all the Indian intellectuals who actually
[Guest 1]: went abroad to originally appear for the civil services were also exposed to this. Right.
[Guest 1]: So for me, it's not interesting that Nehru was influenced by Lasky. For me, what is interesting
[Guest 1]: is Trilok Singh and P. N. Haksar are Lasky students. Right. P. N. Haksar is the most
[Guest 1]: important advisor to Indira Gandhi and Trilok Singh is like, you know, sort of the first
[Guest 1]: de facto writer of, you know, the first five year plan and things like that. So I think
[Guest 1]: that is the more interesting thing. You know, when Ajay said that if the three of us were
[Guest 1]: advising them, you know, maybe we would have gone with the vein of what things were or
[Guest 1]: we would have advised them differently. But that's the point. The army of people advising
[Guest 1]: Nehru other than a very small minority, the people in the civil services, the people who
[Guest 1]: are actually executing these war controls, they have largely wholesale bought into this
[Guest 1]: idea that development can be led by the state. They are very far from the Scottish Enlightenment
[Guest 1]: view. And second, even post-World War, when the world is now saying, hey, we need to once
[Guest 1]: again embrace liberalism and trade, the global consensus among elite economists says that's
[Guest 1]: the prescription for developed countries. Developing countries still need industrial
[Guest 1]: policy and import substitutions because they need to be protected. And, you know, it takes
[Guest 1]: the South Korean and Taiwanese miracle in some sense for that view to change and like
[Guest 1]: Anne Kruger and Bhagwati and all to come along and say, hang on a second, I don't think this
[Guest 1]: is a good prescription for developing countries. Developing countries are doing great without,
[Guest 1]: you know, industrial policy and import substitution. In fact, they're getting impoverished because
[Guest 1]: of this. So there is a scaffolding of ideas which is being held up by people in positions
[Guest 1]: of power within the bureaucracy in politics, which we have now forgotten because we don't
[Guest 1]: read all this in history. But I think that is the critical part as opposed to Nehru did
[Guest 1]: this and, you know, Manmohan Singh did that. Manmohan Singh happens to be an academic economist.
[Guest 1]: So we put him in a different category, but like Nehru did this or Bajpai did that or,
[Guest 1]: you know, Narsimha Rao did this. I think that's a little bit reductive version, both in 91
[Guest 1]: and in 47.
[Amit Varma]: Right. Fascinating. And, you know, on the note of what you were saying about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the economic temper of the times and how the world was generally evolving, just a point
[Amit Varma]: and a recommendation. And the point is that at one point, and this might confuse some
[Amit Varma]: listeners, that you said that you spoke about the move away from Scottish enlightenment
[Amit Varma]: ideals of individual freedom and personal liberty and all of that happening with progressivism
[Amit Varma]: and Nazism and command and control. And the listener might wonder, but these are all different
[Amit Varma]: things. But the ways in which they are moved away from enlightenment ideals is that they
[Amit Varma]: all focus on the collective over the individual on group identities instead of individual
[Amit Varma]: identities. And they are all flawed in different ways and to different extents. But in that
[Amit Varma]: sense, that's kind of what you meant. And the recommendation I have is that a book I
[Amit Varma]: read recently, The Clash of Economic Ideas by our mutual friend Lawrence H. White, where
[Amit Varma]: he kind of talks about this evolution of economic thinking and ideology through those decades,
[Amit Varma]: including an excellent chapter on India as well, which is a book I'd heartily recommend.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a much broader question, which might seem like a bit of a ramble. So please indulge
[Amit Varma]: me while I go on it, which actually goes back to one of my pet themes of how do we form
[Amit Varma]: ideas? How do we form our view of the world? For example, one way in which we do that is
[Amit Varma]: through personal experience. Like there's an anecdote I wrote about in a column of mine
[Amit Varma]: and which I talk about sometimes to talk about the importance of reading is something that
[Amit Varma]: a friend of Narendra Modi once told me that, you know, she knew him a decade ago. And when
[Amit Varma]: he was Gujarati and she was hanging out at his place with a bunch of friends, there were
[Amit Varma]: six or seven of them. And at one point, Mr. Modi started telling a story about how his
[Amit Varma]: mother was ill when he was a kid, and she was feeling very hot. And he went to open
[Amit Varma]: the fan, and he found there was no electricity. And as Mr. Modi told the story, apparently
[Amit Varma]: he started crying. And my friend's point in telling me the story was that his view of
[Amit Varma]: the world is very experiential, that anything he can experience, he gets it. Otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: he doesn't. So for example, when he becomes CM, he tries hard to electrify every village
[Amit Varma]: of Gujarat. He cares about roads because he can see them, he can walk on them, he has
[Amit Varma]: experienced them. But there are other things which you can't experience things like how
[Amit Varma]: markets work, how spontaneous order works, a positive sumness of things. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: those are where he is deficient. And you know, and my point in the column was that people
[Amit Varma]: should read a lot more. So that's how we gather dots and, you know, paint more high definition
[Amit Varma]: pictures. But in the case of someone who hasn't been lucky enough to read a lot, my suggestion
[Amit Varma]: was that have a lot of humility, always talk to experts, which is something he didn't do.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of the massive blunders of, you know, his time as Prime Minister from you
[Amit Varma]: know, demonetization and so on, are really in a sense due to his being this kind of an
[Amit Varma]: akho dekhi Prime Minister and not being humble enough to correct for that. The other way
[Amit Varma]: that we arrive at views of the world is actually through the opposite of this, like in this
[Amit Varma]: case is perhaps a lack of education, but we also arrive at wrong views of the world through
[Amit Varma]: education itself, you know, which can depend on where you go to university, where you go
[Amit Varma]: to college and so on. Now, it seems to me that in Nehru's case, it's a bit of both.
[Amit Varma]: For example, in his autobiography, he has this interesting line where he writes, I have
[Amit Varma]: long been drawn to socialism and communism and Russia has appealed to me, I realize more
[Amit Varma]: and more how the very basis and foundation of our acquisitive society and property was
[Amit Varma]: violence, stop quote. So he's got a negative notion of private property, because the aspect
[Amit Varma]: of which that he has seen is the violent aspect of it. Similarly, he would have a negative
[Amit Varma]: notion of markets, because he would associate it with you know, his akho dekhi experience
[Amit Varma]: of the British state, which of course came from the East India Company, which was exploitative,
[Amit Varma]: which was, you know, all of those things that people sometimes caricature markets as today.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, when it comes to sort of getting his ideology, again, Time magazine once wrote
[Amit Varma]: about him in a 1951 piece, quote, Beatrice and Sidney Webb, the godparents of Fabian
[Amit Varma]: socialism are in a truer sense, his creators in Vishnu and Shiva, stop quote. And at a
[Amit Varma]: later point in time, you know, John Kenneth Galbraith wrote, quote, the center of Nehru's
[Amit Varma]: sinking was Lasky, stop quote. And Ram Guha once quoted an unnamed person saying, quote,
[Amit Varma]: in every meeting of the Indian cabinet, there is a chair reserved for the ghost of Professor
[Amit Varma]: Harald Lasky, stop quote. So my sort of larger kind of question, which I wonder about is
[Amit Varma]: that on the one hand, you get your view of the world from the things that you see around
[Amit Varma]: you. And you perhaps make simplistic causal inferences from there. On the other hand,
[Amit Varma]: you can do it through education or just through exposure to different worldviews. Because
[Amit Varma]: when we are young, we are searching for ways to make sense of the world. The first simplistic
[Amit Varma]: ideology that seems to explain everything that is coherent, it could be untrue, but
[Amit Varma]: it could be coherent, just appeals to us. And sometimes sadly, we become wedded to that.
[Amit Varma]: So that's one view of how, you know, a person's view of the world can be formed. But the counterpoint
[Amit Varma]: to that is that there is something more happening here that the aankho dekhi element doesn't
[Amit Varma]: really matter so much because what we see in today's times in modern politics is that
[Amit Varma]: narratives are more important than reality, which is why you have so many young people,
[Amit Varma]: you know, born after the fall of the Soviet Union and the Berlin Wall and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: who haven't, you know, experienced any of the horrors of communism or socialism gone
[Amit Varma]: wrong in the 20th century, suddenly drawn to those ideologies based on coercion, which
[Amit Varma]: then kind of makes me wonder that are we all slaves to these ideologies and you know, a
[Amit Varma]: bit of a ramble, but so I'm not, you know, framing a question here, but what are sort
[Guest 2]: of your thoughts on this?
[Guest 2]: You're absolutely right in thinking and asking the question, how do we learn? And how do
[Guest 2]: many people develop their worldview? And when you try to apply that to Nehru, you have to
[Guest 2]: be in that special corner of the general theory of how people learn, which is that he was
[Guest 2]: one of the most powerful intellectuals of the 20th century. He was no ordinary person.
[Guest 2]: He was a deeply well-read person. He got FaceTime with the smartest people in the world. He,
[Guest 2]: there was no brilliant person of that age that Nehru did not get intensive weekend long
[Guest 2]: conversations with. So there are no simple flaws in what he was thinking. He's the author
[Guest 2]: of the Discovery of India, one of the greatest books ever written. And arguably, if you ever
[Guest 2]: want to step away from Churchill's claim that India is just a geographical expression, that
[Guest 2]: idea was invented in the Discovery of India. It's like the first coherent statement of
[Guest 2]: what is India and you know, what all of us one way or the other define as our concept
[Guest 2]: of India is really, you know, from the Discovery of India. So I will again, take you back to
[Guest 2]: the formative years, the formative years of the INC and of every dreamer for India. Look
[Guest 2]: around the world. Okay. There is racism in the world. That is a very powerful preconception
[Guest 2]: that white people are better. It takes guts. It takes nerve to even rise to the point of
[Guest 2]: saying, no, I'm every bit as good as you. It seems easy for us to say that today. Okay.
[Guest 2]: But think of how many people in India today will think an NRI is better than us. Okay.
[Guest 2]: So racism runs deep and the colonialism in our minds is not merely about evicting the
[Guest 2]: colonial ruler. It's in our minds. It's an enormous act of courage to step out of that
[Guest 2]: and say, I dream that I will be as good as you, if not better. And then when you start
[Guest 2]: looking around in world history, there's just no running away. It's Japan, the Meiji Restoration
[Guest 2]: from 1868 to 1905. In 1905, for the first time in world history, an Asian country, Japan,
[Guest 2]: won a war against a half European country, Soviet Russia, sorry, Czarist Russia. Okay.
[Guest 2]: And that was done in a short time with really a state-led model. It was government leadership.
[Guest 2]: It was the government that planned, we're going to have a steel factory. We're going
[Guest 2]: to build warships. We're going to get kids to learn how radar works and so on. So it
[Guest 2]: is really hard to play the game of rapid industrialization in India and a rapid catch up with the global
[Guest 2]: frontier, which was the UK, without trying to think in ways that were reminiscent of
[Guest 2]: Japan and Soviet Russia. We're different today because we know that those rapid catch-ups
[Guest 2]: really don't happen. And it's a long, slow process. And that's what buys space for a
[Guest 2]: self-organizing system. So things will evolve slowly. We are not saying to ourselves that
[Guest 2]: I want to do this on the time horizons, like 1917 to 1942 or 1943, where you go from the
[Guest 2]: Russian revolution to winning the battle of Stalingrad and becoming the world's greatest
[Guest 2]: land army, or on the time horizon from the Meiji restoration to 1905. We don't worry
[Guest 2]: about those things today, partly because we don't think that even a centrally planned
[Guest 2]: system can particularly do that. Essential to the conception of a self-organizing system
[Guest 2]: is to take a little more time, but it will be done right. And it will be a decent, fair
[Guest 2]: outcome. You have to also notice how Nehru constantly says to himself and to everybody
[Guest 2]: that we want to do all the great things of Soviet Russia without the concentration camps
[Guest 2]: and without the purges and without the massacres. So he was searching for that middle road,
[Guest 2]: that how do you achieve the decency of the UK? How do you achieve civil liberties and
[Guest 2]: constitutionalism and the lack of violence against your own people while achieving a
[Guest 2]: Soviet style catch up to the global frontier?
[Amit Varma]: You know, having said that, you know, you look at the Soviet Union and you say, okay,
[Amit Varma]: we want to do, you know, ABC, but we don't want to do X, Y, Z, we'd rather be like Britain.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, he's looking at a particular aspect of Britain. You know, Britain was also
[Amit Varma]: in many ways, much more laissez-faire, for example, than they are today. Like at one
[Amit Varma]: point, you know, there is this famous quote from this Time Magazine 1951 piece on Nehru,
[Amit Varma]: where they wrote, quote, he shares all the socialist emotional tenets about the capitalist
[Amit Varma]: order. In consequence, he has a socialist undisguised contempt for capitalism, reinforced
[Amit Varma]: by the aristocratic Brahmin's contempt for the Baniya caste. He speaks of the quote Baniya
[Amit Varma]: civilization of the capitalist West, stop quote, of the West cutthroat civilization.
[Amit Varma]: Utterly unlike Gandhi, he admires modern production methods and wants to bring them to India.
[Amit Varma]: But as a socialist, he believes that capitalism after his prodigies of production is bound
[Amit Varma]: to make a bloody and cruel mess of distribution. This view is based on the standard British
[Amit Varma]: socialist reading of 19th century economic history. His understanding of 20th century
[Amit Varma]: American capitalism is negligible, stop quote. And so it's a particular strand of thinking,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which was in England that he's really focusing on. He's not focusing on all the
[Amit Varma]: other things that are happening there.
[Guest 2]: If you want a simple model, he was trying to do, you know, X percent of the UK and one
[Guest 2]: minus X of the USSR. So it's going to be pretty bad.
[Amit Varma]: And is there also then a certain intellectual arrogance and therefore simple mindedness
[Amit Varma]: in people who are drawn towards these kind of command and control models of thinking
[Amit Varma]: about the world?
[Guest 2]: Once again, in defense of those people, I just want to say that we each of us struggle
[Guest 2]: to decide for the world. And if you and I were in those times, we would think differently.
[Guest 2]: So, my father started out as a card carrying member of the Communist Party. And he changed
[Guest 2]: his mind completely over the years. But the point is that in that age, when you looked
[Guest 2]: at the world, it looked different.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm not talking about the specific people. My question, I would say even applies today
[Amit Varma]: that are certain kinds of people applied and I'm thinking aloud here completely. So I might
[Amit Varma]: find this a silly question when I listen back on it. But are certain kinds of people drawn
[Amit Varma]: to certain kinds of ideology?
[Guest 1]: Well, I think there are two things going on. One is the characteristic of the individual,
[Guest 1]: you know, which can change whether it's Nehru or Indira Gandhi or whoever. And the second
[Guest 1]: is the ecosystem that they inhabit, right? Now, I'm a product of a very particular ecosystem,
[Guest 1]: right? I mean, it's not like I sprung out of the soil as an economist or as a, you know,
[Guest 1]: free market leaning economist or anything like that. I was as socialist as anyone else
[Guest 1]: reading about overpopulation, five-year plans, punch-shield agreements in our civics textbooks,
[Guest 1]: right? Emergency and your trains ran on time. But I was very fortunate and privileged. I
[Guest 1]: had an exceptional economics professor, principles of microeconomics, you know, the basics of
[Guest 1]: trade, all this, you know, the basics I was telling you, the shortages and, you know,
[Guest 1]: excess demand, excess supply, all this, like the basic stuff, he just explained it so well
[Guest 1]: to me, it was hard to unsee the world after that. Now, if I think about my own intellectual
[Guest 1]: trajectory post undergraduate economics, once I understood that, I gravitated more towards
[Guest 1]: books that would help explain that better. I gravitated towards people who explained
[Guest 1]: to me that, you know, why is everyone disagreeing with me? Why do I see markets as a good thing
[Guest 1]: and everyone else seems to think I'm bananas, right? So you start getting together with
[Guest 1]: the Amit Vermas and the Ajay Shahs of the world, and they are able to explain a little
[Guest 1]: bit better to you that, hey, this is happening because of this, right? So this is the analytical
[Guest 1]: framework you're using, you're right, other people are wrong, not because they're stupid
[Guest 1]: or malicious or malevolent, it is because there's a fundamental misunderstanding in their mind
[Guest 1]: about how this particular thing works, or when they say socialism, they mean something
[Guest 1]: else or when they say markets, they mean something else. And then I've been incubated in that
[Guest 1]: ecosystem for a really long time, I eventually got a PhD, I happened to get a PhD from George
[Guest 1]: Mason, which, you know, is a leader in Austrian economics. And, you know, a lot of my own
[Guest 1]: professors worked on the socialist calculation problems, all the things we're talking about
[Guest 1]: today, you mentioned Larry White, he was on my dissertation committee, all this is not
[Guest 1]: by accident, right, that I have turned out the way that I have turned out. So there is
[Guest 1]: something about the ecosystem that is incubating you. So even in that time, right, for every
[Guest 1]: Nehru, you have a Chenoi, okay, Chenoi happens to be one of the people who went to the, you
[Guest 1]: know, went to the UK. And incidentally, he's at the LSE at the same time as all these other
[Guest 1]: guys. But he's more attracted to Karl Popper, and he's more attracted to Frederick Hayek,
[Guest 1]: and he's not so attracted to Lasky, right. But if you talk to BK Nehru, if you talk to
[Guest 1]: Mino Masani, right, same people, similar generation, they go the completely other way. Mino Masani
[Guest 1]: was like card carrying socialist, went on the 10th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution
[Guest 1]: and saw what was the celebrations in Moscow firsthand and things like that, and then changed
[Guest 1]: much later because of a Gandhian view of why Stalinism was bad. So there's an ecosystem
[Guest 1]: that incubates these people. So now Nehru is, of course, exceptional on multiple margins.
[Guest 1]: He's an exceptional mind. He has access to an exceptional ecosystem. Now, did he meet
[Guest 1]: every possible individual that he could have met and took in every possible view? No, but
[Guest 1]: that's fine. He took as many elite views into question of that time as he possibly could.
[Guest 1]: And you know, now talking about this aankhon dekhi business, he's also got results like
[Guest 1]: India was growing at maybe 1, 1.2% in colonial India, especially by the time the war came
[Guest 1]: along. By the time 15 years of Nehru was done, we're roughly growing at, you know, three
[Guest 1]: and a half to four and a half percent. That's a pretty big jump. So not only is Nehru's
[Guest 1]: model working, it's working far better than anything that he inherited from the colonial
[Guest 1]: masters right now. Everything goes to hell right after that. But at the time, it's not
[Guest 1]: just that he's not willing to look at the world or not willing to look at evidence.
[Guest 1]: The evidence is in his corner, right? The elites are kind of supporting what he's saying.
[Guest 1]: There are very few people who are disagreeing with him. Most of the people he trusts who
[Guest 1]: are trained by, you know, other people at top universities are, you know, going along
[Guest 1]: the same way as he is. It would be very surprising if he went a different way, to be very honest,
[Guest 1]: right? Everyone else who went a different way did so for various other reasons in different
[Guest 1]: coalitions at a different point in time. So a Tantra party, which, you know, to me is
[Guest 1]: probably politically most aligned to the way of thinking for, you know, not just me, perhaps
[Guest 1]: all three of us. They are conservative on many social issues, right? They're very conservative
[Guest 1]: on things like caste in a way that Nehru and Ambedkar are not, for instance, right? They
[Guest 1]: are explicitly allies with the aristocracy of India, which is all the Maharajas who in
[Guest 1]: a sense are, you know, your Maharajas and Zamindars are the feudal lords. Now, I'm not
[Guest 1]: saying anything about the character of these people like Gayatri Devi and all the people
[Guest 1]: they allied with, but it's a very odd group of people to make your allies in post-colonial
[Guest 1]: India when you have a different vision for India, which is, you know, India needs to
[Guest 1]: not just be economically prosperous, but also needs to be politically free and equal and
[Guest 1]: caste needs to go away and feudalism needs to go away. So with every group of people,
[Guest 1]: I'm sure if we had a deep enough discussion, we would find something terribly, terribly
[Guest 1]: wrong with the ecosystem that they inhabited and the kinds of, you know, ideas that, that
[Guest 1]: they borrowed. Having said that, I think there is also a really big problem in any of us
[Guest 1]: viewing that we have the right idea or the right model of the world. It is scientism
[Guest 1]: at its worst, right? So when people say we have, even when free market economists say,
[Guest 1]: hey, we figured this out, to me, that's, that's the worst thing I can hear from anyone. It
[Guest 1]: immediately terrifies me. Have we really figured it out? Yes, we know certain things for sure.
[Guest 1]: We know that resources are scarce. We know that there are unintended consequences when
[Guest 1]: you try and command and control these things. We know there are very early limits to human
[Guest 1]: ability to process decentralized knowledge and therefore control the economy. But having
[Guest 1]: said that, have markets just managed to solve everything? Has decentralized and spontaneous
[Guest 1]: order figured everything out? There are a lot of, you know, decentralized spontaneous
[Guest 1]: long-term orders, which are quite perverse, you know, and you can find examples of witchcraft
[Guest 1]: abroad. You can find examples of caste system, misogyny, patriarchy. These are all, by the
[Guest 1]: way, also spontaneous orders like markets and language. They're not so great. Okay.
[Guest 1]: So everything's going to have something. So anyone who says that we figured this out is
[Guest 1]: very problematic. What we can do, the best we can do as experts is find a framework through
[Guest 1]: which we can carefully look through both theoretical frameworks and the empirical evidence and
[Guest 1]: say, this is what we know. And given what we know, I think this is what we proceed.
[Guest 1]: And I think Nehru and company did that reasonably well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, I don't know why you went off on the Nehru tangent because I wasn't
[Amit Varma]: even talking about Nehru. Like my last few questions were just general broad questions
[Amit Varma]: and I'm not litigating Nehru. I have great admiration for him, though it must be pointed
[Amit Varma]: out to listeners that he was anything but liberal. In fact, you know, these days people
[Amit Varma]: are talking about the sedition law and the thing is the Supreme Court of India struck
[Amit Varma]: down the sedition law in 1950. Nehru brought it back with the first amendment, right? So
[Amit Varma]: in many ways, he was an anti-liberal and definitely in his thinking of markets.
[Guest 1]: To overcome the Communist Party. There is that part of the story, right?
[Amit Varma]: To overcome his political enemies. You know, it doesn't matter who your political enemies
[Amit Varma]: are. You know, they are not anti-national just because they're opposed to you and you're
[Amit Varma]: in power. A lesson we should remember from today and something that, in fact, aligns
[Amit Varma]: him with Mr. Modi today. The other thing I would say is that the right model of the world
[Amit Varma]: you use that phrase is humility. You know, that is the only right model of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, which kind of just to elaborate, though I won't ask you to respond to it, but
[Amit Varma]: just to elaborate on what I meant by does character determine the kind of choices that
[Amit Varma]: you make that I find that a lot of ideologies will draw intellectually lazy people because
[Amit Varma]: it is far easier to say, for example, believe a particular narrative of victimhood, whether
[Amit Varma]: it is coming from the right or the left and then think in terms of group identities, rather
[Amit Varma]: than get down and messy and accept that everyone contains multitudes, the world is deeply complicated.
[Amit Varma]: You can't just cast black and white judgments on different things. And I think gaining that
[Amit Varma]: kind of humility to be able to have the rigor to constantly keep questioning your assumptions
[Amit Varma]: is sort of an important quality to have. You know, you mentioned B.R. Shenoy. And the thing
[Amit Varma]: is when Nehru, I think in the mid 50s, got those 21 economists together to give their
[Amit Varma]: perspectives on, you know, I think the second planet was. B.R. Shenoy was the only one who
[Amit Varma]: dissented and therefore he was completely cast out. A bureaucrat, in fact, described
[Amit Varma]: him as quote unquote a madman and which is just crazy. Similarly, you look at Massani,
[Amit Varma]: great admiration because he bucked the trend. You know, first he followed the trend by,
[Amit Varma]: you know, becoming a communist like his peers, following the whatever the intellectual fashion
[Amit Varma]: around him must have been. But then he had the humility to keep questioning his assumptions
[Amit Varma]: and to sort of look beyond that. So that was a question unrelated to this episode or to
[Amit Varma]: Nehru or to anything. It's just something that I generally sort of think about, which
[Amit Varma]: is why, you know, I sort of deployed labels when they are used in modern times, even a
[Amit Varma]: label like libertarian, because it immediately seems to put you in a tribe. It seems to put
[Amit Varma]: you in a fixed place that this is where you are and this is who you are and these are
[Amit Varma]: the people with whom you belong. And I find that at some level that it's a problem. Like
[Amit Varma]: my view of the world is that I am firm on values, which is individual rights and freedom
[Amit Varma]: and whatever. But I am completely open on, you know, accepting new facts about the world
[Amit Varma]: and changing the way I think with regard to those new facts. But that's a digression.
[Amit Varma]: Another quick general question before we come to the specifics of post-independence India,
[Amit Varma]: which is that one criticism people can make is that we refer to everything before 1991
[Amit Varma]: as socialism. And people will point to the textbook definition of socialism and say that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, that's, you know, socialism is good. It means the state owns everything. There's
[Amit Varma]: no private property. What was there wasn't socialism. And the way that I think about
[Amit Varma]: it and you know, you can respond to that and say how you think is that I think a more accurate
[Amit Varma]: way of describing India before 91 was statist and it is less statist but still very statist.
[Amit Varma]: And that statism is actually inevitable if you go down the socialist road, because power
[Amit Varma]: always corrupts. So you will always under a socialist system or for that matter, a Nazi
[Amit Varma]: system or, you know, various different systems which look different, end up in the state
[Amit Varma]: having too much power. So I don't really care so much about the terms. The way that I kind
[Amit Varma]: of view them is how much power does the state have? How much statism is there? And that's
[Amit Varma]: really the fault line along which I look at those things. So how would you guys think
[Amit Varma]: about that?
[Guest 1]: I would disagree a little bit in the following sense. I mean, I know this word socialism
[Guest 1]: means like 40 different things to many people. For some people, it just means good intentions.
[Guest 1]: For some people, it means removing inequality. And for at least Ajay and I here are professional
[Guest 1]: economists, right? There is something very specific about socialism here, where number
[Guest 1]: one, you control the means of production, right? So that is a very classic socialist
[Guest 1]: system thing, which is different from progressivism or, you know, the kind of guild forms under
[Guest 1]: fascism. There is something very specific about socialism where the aim is to control
[Guest 1]: the means of production. The second is the kind of price and quantity controls. You can
[Guest 1]: have a very statist economy. You can have a huge welfare economy that doesn't actively
[Guest 1]: distort prices, right? Or quantities. And one classic aspect of socialism is that it
[Guest 1]: will actually impose price and quantity controls. So I will disagree. I do agree with you that
[Guest 1]: India has always been statist, okay? And that some of it is worse and some of it is better.
[Guest 1]: In fact, on some margins, India is more statist today than it was before. But I will very
[Guest 1]: explicitly say that India was socialist for a very large chunk of time between, say, 1938,
[Guest 1]: 1939, till 1988, you know, and some parts even maybe until 1993, depending on when you
[Guest 1]: are choosing the cutoff of which price controls come in and which ones go away. But for a
[Guest 1]: good part of those four or five decades, it's very clear that India is socialist. The aim
[Guest 1]: is to control means of production. And the aim is whatever the market allocation is,
[Guest 1]: we're not happy with it. We're going to impose price and quantity controls.
[Guest 2]: I fully agree. The right way to think about it is that what is the role of markets in
[Guest 2]: determining the organization of economic activity? It's about prices. It's about technology.
[Guest 2]: It's about products, processes, industries, firms. Okay, so do you want the government
[Guest 2]: to decide? Do you want the government to pick winners? Do you want the government to choose
[Guest 2]: what is appropriate technology? Or do you want to let private people figure out what
[Guest 2]: is right and let the price system sort out what works and what doesn't work? A big date
[Guest 2]: in my mind is 1942, when there were large scale controls brought in by the British,
[Guest 2]: which were in the nature of trade controls, trade restrictions, and capital controls.
[Guest 2]: The first capital controls in India's history came in 1942. So it seems like an unbelievably
[Guest 2]: free age that before 1942 in British India, people from within India were able to travel
[Guest 2]: all over the British Empire without a passport or a visa, and move assets in and out of India
[Guest 2]: and build multinational empires. So it's a level of freedom that is just incomprehensibly
[Guest 2]: far away from where we are in India today. So it's bracing to look back at how much freedom
[Guest 1]: has been lost. But you know, even on this traveling abroad
[Guest 1]: thing, like Ajay talked about how he went in 1987 to start his PhD, he didn't tell you
[Guest 1]: how hard it was to collect the foreign exchange through legal means, to be able, you know,
[Guest 1]: like that those $200 or whatever it is you need to, I don't know what the allotment was
[Guest 1]: in 87. But to just collect that, I mean, it's like, it's not a family effort. It's like
[Guest 1]: a quasi city effort, right? Every single person you know, has been drafted into the effort
[Guest 1]: of getting that very limited foreign exchange. And all this just so someone like Ajay can
[Guest 1]: show up in LA and you know, the first couple of weeks of meals and basics are sorted out
[Guest 1]: and then he'll figure out his own foreign exchange from that point on, right? It's sort
[Guest 1]: of incredible when we talk about these controls, we talk about it in a mythical sense, right?
[Guest 1]: There's a control on foreign exchange as a foreign exchange as a person and a sentient
[Guest 1]: being. It's just current. The control is really on human beings, right? Human beings ability
[Guest 1]: to trade, human beings ability to spend, Narayan Murthy's ability to get a mainframe computer.
[Guest 1]: So these foreign exchange controls, we just call them currency controls, we should call
[Guest 1]: them I'm controlling your ability to do whatever it is you wish to do with your money.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a good clarification. And also a useful clarification about socialism and
[Amit Varma]: I'll defer to your views. It's kind of irritating, you know, in popular parlance, people will
[Amit Varma]: often use socialism as a synonym for something that is good for society. And actually, a
[Amit Varma]: lot of these terms are very loaded because they really mean the opposite. Like socialism
[Amit Varma]: certainly is not good for society, as we've seen all through the 20th century. You know,
[Amit Varma]: progressives are often the least progressive people around. In America, especially liberals
[Amit Varma]: aren't really that liberal. So these terms are kind of very loaded. So if you're a lay
[Amit Varma]: person just kind of listening in from the outside, you'll say, hi, I'm a progressive
[Amit Varma]: too. Socialism is a good thing. But then you talk to an economist and you are like, oh,
[Amit Varma]: these economists are such boring people. Socialism is still a good thing. But moving on from
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, I keep telling my writing students that avoid abstract things, speak
[Amit Varma]: about the concrete. So let's kind of get concrete, that fine, we gain independence, Nehru takes
[Amit Varma]: over, we already know his mindset, as he said to JRD Tata once, quote, do not speak to me
[Amit Varma]: of profit, profit is a dirty word, stop quote. So you know that this is not only someone
[Amit Varma]: who wants the state to play a big role in society, he also distrusts private enterprise
[Amit Varma]: and is against individual liberty in that particular domain. Now, is economic policy
[Amit Varma]: really evolving during this time? And why is it so bad for us? And what about it works?
[Amit Varma]: Like you pointed out, he did get the growth rate up from 1% to 3.5%, which was famously
[Amit Varma]: called the Hindu rate of growth. But it was, you know, that was a pun on the secular rate
[Amit Varma]: of growth, which is a term economists use. But so what worked about it? And what didn't
[Guest 2]: work about it? As I see that period, there was a view including amongst folks like the
[Guest 2]: Bombay plan, there were things like steel mills and machine tools, and electricity generation
[Guest 2]: equipment that were difficult to organize for private persons. Okay, so I remember I
[Guest 2]: had a conversation with Bimal Jalan once, who said something remarkable to me, he said
[Guest 2]: in the 50s, when we in India, which is a mixture of private or public, when we in India, would
[Guest 2]: desire to set up a factory, very often we would fail. It seems inconceivable today.
[Guest 2]: Today, it seems that you just have to have the money, you'll be able to get the right
[Guest 2]: engineering consultants who will do the design of the factory, you'll buy all the right capital
[Guest 2]: goods today, all the world's good capital goods available in India, there is an ample
[Guest 2]: supply of construction contractors who build the factory, they switch on the factory, it's
[Guest 2]: going to work. Okay, but the level of capability in India at that time was unbelievably low.
[Guest 2]: There was also a lack of finance. Now, you and I, one of our first responses will be
[Guest 2]: very well, if you can't make steel, that's okay, let's import steel. There's nothing
[Guest 2]: wrong with importing steel. It's no sin to say that in my country, I'm unable to make
[Guest 2]: steel and I'd rather import steel. And for whatever reasons, these people were mistrustful
[Guest 2]: of international trade and wanted to do it themselves. They wanted to build steel themselves.
[Guest 2]: So then they were posed with a certain problem that there was an area of so-called heavy
[Guest 2]: industry, which were large complex capital intensive factories that were essential for
[Guest 2]: the rest of industrialization. So that led to proposition one, that the government's
[Guest 2]: going to do it, the government will build the public sector companies who will be that
[Guest 2]: heavy industry. It almost seems farcical today to think that this would be a bright idea.
[Guest 2]: But a lot of very smart people at that time thought this was the way to go. And amusingly
[Guest 2]: enough, if you read the Bombay Club, which is the business community of Bombay, they
[Guest 2]: are pretty much asking for the same. They're saying that, look, I can make light machinery,
[Guest 2]: I can make consumer goods, but I can't do the heavy industry myself.
[Guest 2]: Side by side with this is a finance story, which is where is this money going to come
[Guest 2]: from? And at that time, the taxation capabilities of the government were quite limited. The
[Guest 2]: formalization of the economy was quite limited. There were also a bunch of regulatory disasters
[Guest 2]: on insurance companies and banks. And again, with the benefit of hindsight, we would say
[Guest 2]: what was needed was to build state capacity in banking regulation, or state capacity in
[Guest 2]: insurance regulation. But those are very modern ideas which are not present today.
[Guest 2]: So alongside the government-led and government-planned machinery in the real sector, there came a
[Guest 2]: government-led and government-planned machinery in the financial sector, where the government
[Guest 2]: built a whole financial system. There were government banks, there were pretty much only
[Guest 2]: government banks. The government had a monopoly in life insurance, the government had a monopoly
[Guest 2]: in general insurance, the government had a monopoly in mutual funds, and so on.
[Guest 2]: So in one after another element of finance, the government directly controlled the financial
[Guest 2]: system. So the words used, again, I cringe at the words, but at the time, the words used
[Guest 2]: were that the state would mobilize savings and direct them into applications in investment.
[Guest 2]: So you really didn't have a modern concept of a market-based financial system where private
[Guest 2]: people and speculators and risk and return would generate the allocation of capital.
[Guest 2]: Those are very modern concepts in India today. If I may say, only understood in a limited
[Guest 2]: way by most people in the Indian landscape.
[Guest 2]: So if I had to characterize that period, this was that story of government leadership in
[Guest 2]: the real sector, based on the notion that if we don't do this, the private sector will
[Guest 2]: not do it. Plus, government control of the financial system undertaken in an autarkic
[Guest 2]: environment where you don't do international trade, you don't do international capital
[Guest 2]: flows. So that's my rough description of what was done.
[Guest 2]: And exactly, Amit, as you said a moment ago, once you go down this route, it just goes
[Guest 2]: bad and it gets worse because we will experience one failure after another. Today, we know
[Guest 2]: that the only flexible, endlessly thinking, endlessly adapting system is a market economy.
[Guest 2]: When they try to do these state-led projects, then every day the steam would come out of
[Guest 2]: some sprockets that doesn't work and there'd be a problem there. So you would layer on
[Guest 2]: one more rule and one more rule and one more rule. And this is a complexity layers on complexity
[Guest 2]: and it becomes an incomprehensibly rigid, inflexible system where basically nobody's
[Guest 2]: thinking. So there's the silence of a graveyard that happens in a centrally planned system.
[Guest 2]: When the government is telling you about products and processes, the private sector switches
[Guest 2]: off their minds and they say, just tell me what to do, I'll do it. And it becomes just
[Guest 2]: one big bureaucracy, becomes a world of obedience. There's a lack of creativity, there's a lack
[Guest 2]: of innovation, there's a lack of hunger. And there's more than an echo of all these maladies
[Guest 2]: around us in India today. In large parts of the Indian economy today, you've got the deadness
[Guest 2]: of central planning systems where a government chooses the technology, a government tells
[Guest 2]: you, which is the way to do something. And the employees of private firms basically become
[Guest 2]: like glorified bureaucrats. They just say, look, you tell me the policy, I'll do it.
[Guest 2]: It's too risky for a private person to put capital on the line and take a risk of innovating
[Guest 2]: and building something.
[Guest 1]: I would add a couple of things to this. One is the state capacity problem goes on for
[Guest 1]: a very long time in India, and it really starts with the East India Company. And I don't want
[Guest 1]: to blame everything wrong with India on East India Company and the colonial powers. But
[Guest 1]: the fact of the matter is that investments in state capacity were very low. So there
[Guest 1]: are multiple reasons why they call India the extractive, the worst victim of the British
[Guest 1]: extractive economy, because all the taxation that was collected, all the resources that
[Guest 1]: were diverted, not much of it was invested in India. And if we really think about Scottish
[Guest 1]: enlightenment values, right, and we bring them on to the modern world, especially the
[Guest 1]: financial sector, nobody is saying that there is no role for the state. Most of us who are
[Guest 1]: talking about a certain kind of decentralized emergent order, we think of the role of the
[Guest 1]: state in a very specific way, which is it needs to enforce contracts, right? It needs
[Guest 1]: to bring in some basic financial regulation. It needs to have disclosure requirements so
[Guest 1]: that people who are investing know what kind of risks they are exposed to, right? It needs
[Guest 1]: to have some kind of financial, you know, regulatory infrastructure so that there aren't
[Guest 1]: like repeated runs on banks and, you know, all the basic stuff. Now, the fact of the
[Guest 1]: matter is this infrastructure was not present in India, okay? India was low on bureaucrats
[Guest 1]: per capita. It was low on judges per capita, on contract enforcement per capita. Even in
[Guest 1]: colonial times, this is not just a modern day problem. So now if you don't have a sensible
[Guest 1]: way of enforcing contracts, then obviously you're going to worry a lot about fraud in
[Guest 1]: the market, right? Which means I live in the United States and I have very little fear
[Guest 1]: of fraud, right? Because there is so much, you know, both market competition and consumer
[Guest 1]: protection and litigation and tort law and, you know, like the regulatory, you know, sort
[Guest 1]: of they will throw the book at any firm that is, you know, negligent in the behavior and
[Guest 1]: I drink something adulterated and get sick or something like that. I literally have zero
[Guest 1]: fear, okay? There is an enormous fear in India in the 1950s of failure that comes from the
[Guest 1]: private sector. So there are two kinds, two, three kinds of fear. One is the basic fear,
[Guest 1]: which is, you know, like what happens when your weed gets adulterated and people get
[Guest 1]: poisoned, you know, that kind of basic level fear and fraud. The second kind of fear is
[Guest 1]: a misallocation. Resources are so scarce that if they went in the hands of the wrong industrialist,
[Guest 1]: then we are wasting these resources, right? They don't understand that, that when there's
[Guest 1]: a bankruptcy, resources just need to switch ownership. The resources themselves don't
[Guest 1]: die. Okay. But there is this great fear. And the third fear is in some sense, the collapse
[Guest 1]: of the system or loss in the faith of the system, right? Like this is your classic run
[Guest 1]: on private banks kind of fear. So if you don't have a sensible state led infrastructure to
[Guest 1]: kind of provide this scaffolding to prevent the worst things that come out of, you know,
[Guest 1]: private or decentralized emergent orders, then you're going to want to clamp down on
[Guest 1]: everything. And I think that is part of it, right? You simply don't trust what is happening
[Guest 1]: in the markets. When markets do function. Now, a lot of the times what I was talking
[Guest 1]: about this, you know, I don't worry about adulteration and like, you know, eating unsafe
[Guest 1]: foods and things like that. Most of it is not state regulated, actually. I'm never checking
[Guest 1]: if there is a, you know, FDA stamp or an ISI stamp on what I'm doing. It's just, I live
[Guest 1]: in a world where market competition is so strong and so robust and reputation is so
[Guest 1]: strong and litigation is so aggressive that I know that I can exist in the shadow of that
[Guest 1]: system and still be safe. Right? Now, even that shadow of that system did not exist in
[Guest 1]: 1950. So I think we need to think about this. It's not like there was this incredible market
[Guest 1]: system which was thriving and amazing and contracts were enforced and Nehru came out
[Guest 1]: of the blue, swooped in and said, no, we're going to end that system and we're going to
[Guest 1]: replace it with this. That system simply didn't exist.
[Guest 2]: I want to disagree slightly. If you think of the capitalism that was present in Bombay
[Guest 2]: pre-independence, if you went on the fort, there was actually something remarkable there,
[Guest 2]: which we sometimes don't give enough credit for. As an example, the Metropolitan Magistrates
[Guest 2]: Court in Bombay was adjudicating commercial disputes based on the British Quality Contracts
[Guest 2]: Act of 1870 and the British Evidence Act of 1870. They came side by side and was writing
[Guest 2]: orders that were decent by early 20th century British standards. It's absolutely mind blowing
[Guest 2]: that in a developing country like India, there was a certain judicial capability, the likes
[Guest 2]: of which, again, we have completely lost in India today. We have declined very badly compared
[Guest 2]: to that period. Where I will fault the policy community of that period, the Nehru of that
[Guest 2]: period, was a failure to recognize the value and the importance of the infrastructure of
[Guest 2]: civilization that we got from the British. We were so angry about the freedom movement.
[Guest 2]: We were so convinced that the British dealt us a bad hand of cards, that we did not sufficiently
[Guest 2]: treasure some of these things and nurture them and build them. And over 20, 30 years,
[Guest 2]: a lot of that collapsed. One little thing about unintended consequences was that all
[Guest 2]: the best lawyers and judges of India at the time were trained in London because there
[Guest 2]: were really no law schools and law universities in India. And it's incredible how damaging
[Guest 2]: it was when the currency controls prevented people from going abroad to study because
[Guest 2]: you couldn't get foreign exchange. Even if you were rich enough to go abroad to study,
[Guest 2]: you couldn't get the foreign exchange. And sure enough, 25 years later, you got a precipitous
[Guest 2]: collapse in the quality of judges and lawyers all over the country because that pipeline
[Guest 2]: had broken. And so I think of some of the British infrastructure of civilization, of
[Guest 2]: the common law, of the courts, of the criminal enforcement as something that the INC did
[Guest 2]: not treasure adequately. We were the sorcerer's apprentice. We got the reins of power, but
[Guest 2]: we didn't understand the intricate checks and balances through which civilization is
[Guest 2]: upheld every day. And we went off with this grand idea of a developmental state and we
[Guest 2]: didn't nurture the foundations of civilization, which is the machinery like the criminal justice
[Guest 2]: system and the courts, the commercial disputes.
[Guest 1]: I think we disagree less than you imagine, Ajay. I agree with you that we have excellent
[Guest 1]: judges at the time. The point is not that we don't have them. The point is we don't
[Guest 1]: have enough of them. So you have excellent courts in all the presidency towns. You have
[Guest 1]: them in Bombay, in Madras, in Calcutta. You go to rural India, there is virtually no modern
[Guest 1]: kind of dispute resolution penetration because these zamindars have simply not made the investments
[Guest 1]: and the colonial powers have just let them run amok with whatever the hell the zamindars
[Guest 1]: want to do. On the other extreme, you have, say, the Maharaja of Mysore or the Maharaja
[Guest 1]: of Travancore, right? They have made enormous investments in education, health, you know,
[Guest 1]: basic public sanitation, court system. And you can see the benefits of that even today
[Guest 1]: in modern day India coming from those states because of investments that were made a hundred
[Guest 1]: years ago. So it's not that I think the British investments, the quality was bad. It's just
[Guest 1]: that I think it wasn't enough and as widespread that India could overnight switch to, you
[Guest 1]: know, removing all market controls and switching. Like if we think about banking, you know,
[Guest 1]: you spoke about Larry White and there's this whole thing. I mean, his whole work is on
[Guest 1]: free banking that emerged during, you know, in Scotland. You look at the Chettiar community
[Guest 1]: in the southern part of India. I mean, just the entrepreneurship, they were basically
[Guest 1]: the financiers of Singapore and Malaysia, right? They would actually travel and they
[Guest 1]: would finance huge projects, right? You had this thing going on in India and then of course
[Guest 1]: all the banking regulation came in and none of their, you know, networks could function
[Guest 1]: anymore and they couldn't quite convert it into a formal bank as easily as they wanted.
[Guest 1]: So all this human capability existed. Some of it existed formally through the British
[Guest 1]: conduits through lawyers and bureaucrats and civil servants and things. Some of it existed
[Guest 1]: through our caste networks, right? There's a Chettiar community, there is a Marwadi community
[Guest 1]: and things like that. But these are still small pockets. The great Scottish enlightenment
[Guest 1]: idea that we can trade with strangers because the institution allows us to trade with strangers
[Guest 1]: and both sides can benefit. That was not the reality in India as I understand India at
[Guest 1]: that time. So I think Ajay and I disagree a lot less than we originally imagined.
[Guest 2]: If I may just try to restate just for both of you to take a stab at it, the proposition
[Guest 2]: I want to hold up for examination is it is remarkable that standing in 2021, we feel
[Guest 2]: that it is more likely for a criminal matter or a commercial dispute to generate a bad
[Guest 2]: outcome with the criminal justice system and the courts of India today as compared to where
[Guest 2]: we were, say, in 1943. I find that a mind-blowing proposition and I wonder why. I blame Nehru
[Guest 2]: and his community for being the sorcerer's apprentice. They were so fascinated that we
[Guest 2]: will go build steel mills. They didn't understand that the real temple of democracy is the courts
[Guest 2]: and the police stations.
[Amit Varma]: Those are really wise words and I can see that you disagree a little bit about disagreeing.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know how we will unravel that. But obviously, I'm not a student of history
[Amit Varma]: and can't talk about the rule of law back then. But just looking around me, every single
[Amit Varma]: businessman friend I have, and I have people who run small businesses and all that, will
[Amit Varma]: tell you that the rule of law is absent. That if there is a dispute, you know, there will
[Amit Varma]: be no dispute resolution. It's just there on paper. You can't actually get anything
[Amit Varma]: done. You survive on different systems that are not encoded in the law, different systems
[Amit Varma]: of trust within the community and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Ajay, a little while back, referred to the deadness of the system and that reminded me
[Amit Varma]: of this great quote by Shashi Tharoor where he's talking about one of Nehru's big mistakes.
[Amit Varma]: And there Tharoor said, quote, Nehru felt it was necessary to have the state to be the
[Amit Varma]: disinterested maibap of the people who would act in the interest of the common person because
[Amit Varma]: a state would not be motivated by profit. Of course, what he failed to realize was that
[Amit Varma]: as a result, he'd put bureaucrats in charge of the commanding heights of the economy rather
[Amit Varma]: than businessmen. And these bureaucrats were better at regulating stagnation and distributing
[Amit Varma]: poverty than actually generating wealth. Stop quote. And you know, Ajay also spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how difficult it was to do any kind of innovation or get permissions to do anything. And there's
[Amit Varma]: a great passage by Gurcharan Das, which I want to read out, which is from his book India
[Amit Varma]: Unbound, which really illustrates this, where he writes, quote, The way that the bureaucracy
[Amit Varma]: went about administering the licensing system created a nightmare for the entrepreneur. An
[Amit Varma]: untrained army of underpaid third-rate engineers with inadequate and ill-organized information
[Amit Varma]: and without clear-cut criteria vetted thousands of applications on an ad hoc basis. The low-level
[Amit Varma]: functionaries took months in the futile micro-review of an application and finally sent it for
[Amit Varma]: approval to the administrative ministry. The ministry again lost months reviewing the same
[Amit Varma]: data before it sent the application to an inter-ministerial licensing committee of senior
[Amit Varma]: bureaucrats who were equally ignorant of entrepreneurial realities and who also operated on ad hoc
[Amit Varma]: criteria in the absence of well-ordered priorities. After the minister's approval, the investor
[Amit Varma]: had to seek approval for the import of machinery from the capital goods licensing committee.
[Amit Varma]: If a foreign collaboration was involved, an inter-ministerial foreign agreements committee
[Amit Varma]: also had to give its consent. If finance was needed from a state finance institution, the
[Amit Varma]: same scrutiny had to be repeated afresh. The result was enormous delays, sometimes lasting
[Amit Varma]: years with staggering opportunities for corruption. Large business houses set up parallel bureaucracies
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi to follow up on their files, organize bribes and win licenses. Tragically, the system
[Amit Varma]: ended in thwarting competition, entrepreneurship and growth without achieving any of his social
[Amit Varma]: objectives. And there's a similar passage I marked out by Rakesh Mohan from his introduction
[Amit Varma]: to the book Transforming India, which I'll link from the show notes. I'm not going to
[Amit Varma]: just keep reading out dystopian passages. And Gurcharan Das's book India Unbound is
[Amit Varma]: also an excellent sort of narrative of this entire period of history, which I think disillusioned
[Amit Varma]: him so much that the moment that it seemed that there could be a turn away from the dispensation
[Amit Varma]: that led India through all these decades of misery, he went all in for Modi and then he
[Amit Varma]: didn't adjust when he saw the reality of what a Modi administration actually was, which
[Amit Varma]: is which is kind of tragic when it happens to people, right, that you have rational reasons
[Amit Varma]: to say support a person. But even when it all goes south, you know, and you should rationally
[Amit Varma]: turn away, you just become sort of embedded in that position. Sorry, that's an aside.
[Amit Varma]: But any thoughts on that?
[Guest 1]: No, but, you know, there is something valuable. I mean, the passage that you're reading, OK,
[Guest 1]: now, you know, again, this is I don't just want to keep separating Ajay and myself from
[Guest 1]: like the rest of the people as if we're like some special category of humans. But you're
[Guest 1]: special for me. Well, well, thank you. Both of you are special to me. But economists do
[Guest 1]: think a little bit differently about this. And especially people like Ajay and myself
[Guest 1]: who are like particularly trained in public choice economics. Right. The way one way to
[Guest 1]: interpret the passage that you read from Gurcharan is that this is about bureaucrats versus entrepreneurs.
[Guest 1]: Right. It's almost like one type of person versus another type. It's very like it's about
[Guest 1]: incentives. But it is the the first thing I know from public choice theory is behavioral
[Guest 1]: symmetry. Right. That every individual is fundamentally the same. There is nothing special
[Guest 1]: about an entrepreneur that is different from a bureaucrat, except that the entrepreneur
[Guest 1]: is the residual claimant in a firm and a bureaucrat is not. Right. So if I put the exact same
[Guest 1]: people and I did some kind of, you know, crazy Chris Nolan type like switch them from one
[Guest 1]: to another in some crazy science fiction movie, they would act the way there's a movie plot
[Guest 2]: that we should have two twins who are separated at birth and one of them becomes the bureaucrat
[Guest 1]: and one of them becomes an entrepreneur. Yeah. And then you flip them and now they act completely
[Amit Varma]: differently than what they are supposed to act like. Right. Well, you could argue Shashi
[Amit Varma]: Kapoor and Amitabh Bachchan did all those films where they are brothers and one is a
[Amit Varma]: police officer and the other is a criminal is exactly that. I want to pick up on that
[Guest 1]: criminal thing later for a minute. OK, but yeah. So it almost seems like, oh, there is
[Guest 1]: this Brahmin Baniya conflict or this, you know, entrepreneur civil servant conflict
[Guest 1]: or, you know, the person who is the low level engineer. I mean, they are low level engineers,
[Guest 1]: not because there's something wrong with them, but because that's the incentive they're in.
[Guest 1]: Their engineers being made to push files is supposed to solve engineering problems. Right.
[Guest 1]: That's why they're low. So there is something problematic, I think, about putting this as
[Guest 1]: a group, this group versus that group or this category of persons versus that category of
[Guest 1]: persons. I don't know if that's what Gurcharan intended to do, but that's the way it seemed
[Guest 1]: to me, just taking one quote out of context. And I think that is where the economists would
[Guest 1]: disagree that the problem lies with. It doesn't matter who ran the system. They could not
[Guest 1]: make it work. Right. You could get, you know, God himself to show up and they couldn't possibly
[Guest 1]: do a better job of the permits than the low class or low quality engineers that, you know,
[Guest 1]: Gurcharan is so mad about. Right. Similarly, there is no entrepreneur who can easily overcome
[Guest 1]: the system and still manage to make a profit and still remain honest. To me, that is the
[Guest 1]: big takeaway. And it also connects to the thing that you said about there's a whole
[Guest 1]: category of people in India who are so exhausted by socialism. They just latched on to Modi
[Guest 1]: when he came around. That again tells you that there is a fundamental misunderstanding.
[Guest 1]: This is not about groups. This is not about people. This is not about Brahmins and Baniyas
[Guest 1]: and Nehru Gandhi versus someone else. It's just a misunderstanding that Modi continued
[Guest 1]: a system without changing it very much, continued a commitment to a status system. In fact,
[Guest 1]: in some margins, like increased the centralized control, did not really trust markets and
[Guest 1]: decentralized actions to do their job. So he's making the same mistake as Nehru did.
[Guest 1]: Nehru's original sin is not investing in education, in primary education. Right. He only invested
[Guest 1]: in like higher level education in health and in local government. I think the lack of local
[Guest 1]: government, which is a byproduct of high degree of centralized planning in India. I mean,
[Guest 1]: no thought of, yeah, we need steel mills, but who's going to pick up the garbage? Right.
[Guest 1]: This is something that was never planned for or thought through. And I think it's the same
[Guest 1]: thing with Modi and his followers, which is because there is a fundamental misunderstanding
[Guest 1]: of what the system is and why it works. There's a lot of blaming of this group versus that
[Guest 1]: group. And there is no real understanding of what is the scaffolding I need to provide?
[Guest 1]: What are the investments I need to make so that a decentralized system can actually do
[Guest 1]: the magic that it's supposed to do the way Adam Smith talked about it? So I think that
[Guest 1]: quote that you read is very valuable, but for a different reason than why you read it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, first of all, I'll come out and say that I don't think that Mr. Daswood necessarily
[Amit Varma]: was taking that view. I think he'd also be aware of the power of incentives. And that's
[Amit Varma]: a point worth underscoring that whenever people talk about a particular system, the bottom
[Amit Varma]: line is we will all respond to incentives, which is why whenever I talk about a system
[Amit Varma]: of governance, I point out that the system of governance you want is a system in which
[Amit Varma]: you should assume the worst person you can think of, the biggest sociopath as a person
[Amit Varma]: in charge. And then if you're okay with it, it's a good system of government because there
[Amit Varma]: are enough checks and balances, there are mechanisms within that which increase accountability,
[Amit Varma]: the incentives are going in the right direction. The other thing I would say, and I don't want
[Amit Varma]: to defend Gurcharan necessarily. And in this case, I'm not because he didn't change his
[Amit Varma]: mind after Modi did all the things that he did. But the point is, you know, the Congress
[Amit Varma]: politician Salman Sos was on my show a year and a half ago or so. And he made the point
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of Modi's rhetoric in 2014 was great, you know, minimum government, maximum
[Amit Varma]: governance, and obviously, he's gone in the opposite direction, that the business of government
[Amit Varma]: is not to be in business or something to that effect, obviously, he's gone in the opposite
[Amit Varma]: direction. A lot of the rhetoric could have fooled people who were open to being fooled,
[Amit Varma]: or who were just simply tired of the existing system as it were. So I don't judge people
[Amit Varma]: who supported say, Modi in 2014, too harshly. But at the same time, if you hadn't realized
[Amit Varma]: what was going on by 2017, then shame on you, then you had anchored yourself to the person
[Amit Varma]: and the party instead of to the principles that you claim to espouse. So, yeah, I haven't
[Guest 1]: spoken to Gurcharan about this personally. So I really can't comment on I don't know
[Guest 1]: what his views were then. And I don't know what they are now. I mean, I meant more generally
[Guest 1]: about how we think of different groups of people, even the entrepreneurs of that time,
[Guest 1]: frankly, I'm not very impressed by them. I mean, we talk about the Bombay plan and things
[Guest 1]: like that. But to me, there are aspects of the Bombay plan which just stink of this bootleggers
[Amit Varma]: and Baptists kind of story, right? It's a point I made to Ram Guha also, he didn't respond
[Amit Varma]: in the particular conversation we were having, but I'd because I guess I didn't push him.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, in his history of post-independent India, he had written about the Bombay plan.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, you see, even the capitalists were aware that too much capitalism is a bad
[Guest 1]: thing. Of course they were because it's barriers to entry. Exactly. So my point there was that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what is good for markets is not necessarily what is good for particular big
[Amit Varma]: businesses. It's always the opposite, that what ideally a free market should be is that
[Amit Varma]: you have no barriers to entry. Anybody can come and compete, competition is the best
[Amit Varma]: regulation. But what businessmen will always want, hey that protect my turf. So obviously,
[Amit Varma]: a big businessman will want something which is very protectionist, where newcomers can't
[Amit Varma]: come up and compete against them, where the state is protecting them, and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. So it is natural, you can't expect a capitalist necessarily to be in favor of
[Amit Varma]: free markets, that you know, what is pro-business and pro-markets can often be exactly the opposite,
[Guest 1]: which is a point a lot of people don't understand. No, and also just the arrogance of it, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, everyone talks about the Tatas and they're a great company, and I have nothing
[Guest 1]: against them. But there's this idea of exceptionalism, right? Indian entrepreneurs can't really make
[Guest 1]: steel except us. We are amazing. We can execute a big power plant really well. But the government
[Guest 1]: is right, we can't trust anyone willy-nilly, right? I mean, today, globally, the largest
[Guest 1]: steel company in the world is ArcelorMittal, okay? So this is, and if you talk to Mittal
[Guest 1]: about it, he's like, oh, I couldn't run a small steel plant in India, so I went to Indonesia,
[Guest 1]: and I decided that's how I'm going to build my steel empire. So it's a little bit interesting
[Guest 1]: how everyone, whether it is with good intentions, whether it is because of hubris, or whether
[Guest 1]: it is very explicit bootlegger and Baptist story that they just want to do this. I don't
[Guest 1]: know these people in question personally, because I wasn't around in those times, nor
[Guest 1]: have I studied them that keenly. So I don't know what was exactly going on in their mind.
[Guest 1]: But I am always very wary of businessmen when they try to dictate economic policy in the
[Guest 1]: specifics and not in the general. And even now, the greatest calls for protectionism
[Guest 1]: in India and increase in tariffs and all this make in India nonsense, a lot of it is coming
[Guest 1]: from industry, right? Your FICCI and CII, these guys are constantly, so the call is
[Guest 1]: always more protectionism for my industry, right? Overall, we think free markets are
[Guest 1]: a great idea. But in my case, I think you should increase the import tariffs so that,
[Guest 1]: you know, my particular firm or industry is protected. So I am overall not, you know,
[Guest 1]: thrilled about any group of people. You know, neither the lowly engineers nor the almighty
[Guest 1]: entrepreneurs. I'm not thrilled with any of them, nor am I impressed.
[Guest 2]: I want to go off on a slight tangent, but linking up to where Amit was a short while
[Guest 2]: ago on how do people learn? How do people form views of the world? So if you are a practitioner,
[Guest 2]: okay, either an employee in a government organization or an employee in a private organization,
[Guest 2]: you're running a business, then it tends to be very difficult to envision a world five
[Guest 2]: years out, 10 years out, 20 years out, that could be significantly different from where
[Guest 2]: we are today. And at every point in India's journey, what I have experienced is that practitioners
[Guest 2]: wear blinkers and consider X, Y, Z to be impossible. It's just too far. It's too complicated. It's
[Guest 2]: too big. It's impossible. We in India will never be able to do it.
[Guest 2]: Okay. I could narrate many examples of it. I want to single out two. The first of them
[Guest 2]: was that when I landed up in India in 1993, at that time, it so happened that an aspirational
[Guest 2]: value for exports, for merchandise exports from India was about a billion dollars a month.
[Guest 2]: So month after month, people would watch that number. And it used to be the case that maybe
[Guest 2]: two, three months a year, you'll be more than a billion dollars. And the rest of the year,
[Guest 2]: we would be less than a billion dollars. And people were just incomprehensibly challenged
[Guest 2]: at understanding the dollar values of exports that were being seen elsewhere in the world.
[Guest 2]: And here we are today, not so many years after that, where we get numbers in excess of $30
[Guest 2]: billion a month of merchandise exports. But the practitioner of that age could never have
[Guest 2]: dreamed this. If you were in the world of business in 1993, you could never imagine
[Guest 2]: an India where we will be doing $30, $35 billion a month of merchandise exports. Because practitioners
[Guest 2]: tend to be extremely detailed and thorough in their understanding of the practical reality
[Guest 2]: in front of them. And that comes with a lack of imagination and an ability to envision
[Guest 2]: different worlds.
[Guest 2]: I want to tell you another story. Some of my good friends were building the taxi company
[Guest 2]: Meru. It was the first radio taxi company of India. And I remember them saying to me
[Guest 2]: that, you know, really there's one particular Toyota car, which is the perfect car to be
[Guest 2]: a taxi. It can take the beating, it can take the 100,000 kilometers a year that are required
[Guest 2]: in the taxi business. But if you take the capital cost of that car into your spreadsheet,
[Guest 2]: you end up with a price per kilometer that just doesn't work in India. And discount rates
[Guest 2]: are bad. Interest rates are very high. So we end up having to buy crappy cars. And every
[Guest 2]: few years we destroy, we throw away the cars and we start over. It's such a shame. Elsewhere
[Guest 2]: in the world, any taxi company would buy these nice Toyota cars. Well, it took all of 10
[Guest 2]: years.
[Guest 2]: In 10 years, the price points in India had shifted, the interest rates in India had shifted,
[Guest 2]: and there were entire taxi fleets coming about, which were those nice Toyota cars. So I think
[Guest 2]: that it's difficult for people to dream deeper into the future. So if you talk to the folks
[Guest 2]: in the Bombay club and you say to them that I will need, you know, a billion dollars to
[Guest 2]: build a steel factory, a billion dollars to build an electricity generation plant, they
[Guest 2]: would find it difficult to reconcile that with the kind of balance sheets and financial
[Guest 2]: access that they were seeing in that age. And I think that's a reminder for all of us
[Guest 2]: that we need to not worry about the practical constraints of the world around us. I think
[Guest 2]: Bill Gates has a great line, the world changes less than you think in one year and more than
[Guest 2]: you think in 10 years. So I think thinking for 10 years, thinking for 20 years is a very
[Guest 2]: different project compared to small incremental improvements of one business or one government
[Guest 2]: department.
[Guest 2]: Practitioners find it very difficult to intellectualize.
[Guest 1]: Just to add to what Ajay is saying, they also don't think about in a very dynamic way and
[Guest 1]: accounting for innovation in particular, right? For them, every technology is improving 5%
[Guest 1]: in productivity in each successive plan, right? That's a really important part. The reason
[Guest 1]: why they don't imagine that the world is going to change that drastically 10 years from now
[Guest 1]: is every year you're only going to make marginal improvements in productivity. So you're never
[Guest 1]: going to get like a great phone or you're never going to get a breakthrough like an
[Guest 1]: mRNA vaccine, right? Which is genuinely a game changer in how we do anything after that
[Guest 1]: in terms of, you know, how little it costs to do things. So they don't think in terms
[Guest 1]: of Zoom or, you know, technology like that, where we're recording right now as a genuine
[Guest 1]: substitute for airline tickets for us to meet and do this in person, right? Those are just
[Guest 1]: things that don't occur to the bureaucratic mind, which do occur to the ordinary mind
[Guest 1]: and the entrepreneurial mind. So the problem is even worse in one sense than what Ajay
[Guest 1]: is saying. It's that not only do they not do it, I don't think they can do it because
[Guest 1]: their spreadsheets can't account for anything more than a marginal change in technology.
[Guest 1]: They can't say, oh, I imagine like Martin Luther King, I have a dream that we're going
[Guest 1]: to have this productivity breakthrough in 10 years. It can't be done.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think what Ajay said reminded me of, you know, that thing they say about futurists
[Amit Varma]: and I say about creators in the modern creator economy, that, you know, we tend to overestimate
[Amit Varma]: the short term and underestimate the long term. And I think that's something to watch
[Amit Varma]: out for. And I'll talk about a framework that I find really fits this very well. But before
[Amit Varma]: we do that, for my listeners, you mentioned bootleggers and Baptists. So I should clarify
[Amit Varma]: for my listeners what exactly that is. Bootleggers and Baptists is a phrase coined by Bruce Sandel,
[Amit Varma]: a regulatory economist. And the whole idea is, you know, if you take the example of prohibition,
[Amit Varma]: a Baptist will preach that, you know, alcohol is a bad thing, it should be banned. And the
[Amit Varma]: moment a ban is in place, a bootlegger will make lots of money. So typically Baptists
[Amit Varma]: and bootleggers go hand in hand. And this is just something that is natural. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: I had once written a film review of the Shah Rukh Khan film Raees, where one of my main
[Guest 1]: criticisms was that...
[Guest 1]: There's a problem with that movie. Because they don't get together.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly. So that was my criticism. Now, here's a framework that I quickly want to
[Amit Varma]: talk about, which I think is moves on from what Ajay was talking about and is also valid
[Amit Varma]: to how we think of the economy in general. And this is something I got from William Easterly,
[Amit Varma]: who's written a bunch of great books, such as The White Man's Burden and The Tyranny
[Amit Varma]: of Experts. And his framework is where he talks about searchers and planners. And he
[Amit Varma]: writes in a 2006 paper, which I'll link from the show notes, he wrote, quote, historically
[Amit Varma]: poverty has never been ended by central planners. It is only ended by searchers, both economic
[Amit Varma]: and political, who explore solutions by trial and error, have a way to get feedback on the
[Amit Varma]: ones that work and then expand the ones that work. All of this in an unplanned, spontaneous
[Amit Varma]: way. Examples of searchers are firms in private markets and democratically accountable politicians.
[Amit Varma]: A planner thinks he already knows the answers. He thinks of poverty as a technical engineering
[Amit Varma]: problem that his answers will solve. A searcher admits he doesn't know the answers in advance
[Amit Varma]:  he believes that poverty is a complicated tangle of political, social, historical, institutional
[Amit Varma]: and technological factors. A searcher only hopes to find answers to individual problems
[Amit Varma]: by trial and error experimentation. A planner believes outsiders know enough to impose solutions.
[Amit Varma]: A searcher believes only insiders have enough knowledge to find solutions, and that most
[Amit Varma]: solutions must be homegrown. Stop quote. And which brings you to the power of local knowledge
[Amit Varma]: in markets and local government and so on. But at one point, and this is where I want
[Amit Varma]: to sort of come at my next question for you guys. At one point, Easterly says, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the planners have the rhetorical advantage of promising great things, the end of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: The only thing the planners have against them is that plans don't work to help the world's
[Amit Varma]: poor. Poor people die not only because of the world's indifference to the poverty, but
[Amit Varma]: also because of ineffective efforts on behalf of those who do care. To escape the cycle
[Amit Varma]: of tragedy, we have to be tough on the ideas of the planners, even while we salute their
[Amit Varma]: goodwill. Stop quote. And it seems to me that here is sort of a key narrative problem. Like
[Amit Varma]: earlier Ajay, you spoke about how we should think of oppression as a default of people
[Amit Varma]: accumulating more and more power as a default and freedom as something we have to fight
[Amit Varma]: for something that requires eternal vigilance as Jefferson put it. So that is one thing
[Amit Varma]: that's the nature of institutions that the moment you give power, power corrupts, and
[Amit Varma]: then it tends to expand. But the other reason that freedom is always got to fight is that
[Amit Varma]: all of these narratives are very appealing. You know, when Indira Gandhi wins an election
[Amit Varma]: on the basis of gareebi hatao, even though all of our policies are actually hurting the
[Amit Varma]: poor, perpetuating poverty, that also kind of becomes a difficult fight to tackle. So
[Amit Varma]: sort of dual questions, I guess that, what do you think of this framework? And is there
[Amit Varma]: something to that, that narrative battle is a real one to fight, otherwise we slip back?
[Guest 2]: It is a huge issue in human affairs. It's not efficient for most people to think for
[Guest 2]: more than 10 minutes before voting. So there will always be an information problem. As
[Guest 2]: Kelkar and I say in the book, most people know more about a motorcycle that they will
[Guest 2]: buy as compared to knowing about the GST because they couldn't care less about what happens
[Guest 2]: or what goes wrong with the GST. So I think of human societies as going through long,
[Guest 2]: slow processes of waking up to figure out that something doesn't work. You know, that
[Guest 2]: the worst thing that you can do for a nation is nationalism. The worst thing you can do
[Guest 2]: for a society is socialism, even though these things sound like very nice labels. So unfortunately,
[Guest 2]: you know, men and nations will do the right thing after trying every reasonable alternative.
[Guest 2]: And it really takes a certain kind of shock therapy to wake up and realize that, oh my
[Guest 2]: God, this really didn't work. If you look back, you needed the second world war to get
[Guest 2]: a lot of sensible people away from the ideology of control, ideology of state domination.
[Guest 2]: Without that, you know, Germany and Japan would not be as perfect and as amazing as
[Guest 2]: they are today. In similar fashion, you know, you needed the murder of Gandhiji to wake
[Guest 2]: up the people of India and, you know, get India going for 50 years in a certain direction
[Guest 2]: and so on. So it is these things that make us learn. Unfortunately, most of us don't
[Guest 2]: learn readily and it's a very slow process and seductive, catchy phrases go a long way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And in fact, public choice theorists have a phrase for that rational ignorance
[Amit Varma]: that for any one voter, it is simply not rational to spend too much time figuring out who to
[Amit Varma]: vote for, because the chance of your one vote making a difference is very minuscule. Though
[Amit Varma]: there was apparently a local election, I think somewhere in the North UP or Rajasthan, which
[Amit Varma]: was lost by a guy with exactly one vote whose family didn't vote, you know, wouldn't have
[Amit Varma]: made for the best dinner table conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Main toh aapke liye ghar pe khana pakha rahi thi. Nahi, woh booth pe kyu nahi gayi.
[Amit Varma]: Nauroji won his MP seat by five votes. Yeah, back in the day where the world population
[Amit Varma]: was 40 people. Yeah, it's different. No, and I'd say to add to rational ignorance, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I think the term rational apathy also works. Because, you know, we speak about how
[Amit Varma]: voters are so apathetic all the time. But I'd say that that apathy is also rational
[Amit Varma]: that man, I gotta get on with my life. It is safe for me to assume that nothing I do
[Amit Varma]: or say in the public domain will make a difference to the world, or will make a difference to
[Amit Varma]: governance or to society. So to hell with it, I'll just get on with my life.
[Guest 2]: So can I take this as a prop to ponder some of the developments that gave us 1991? Okay,
[Guest 2]: so we as a country were sinking into bad rates of growth. And there was just one long period
[Guest 2]: of absolutely horrible things that were happening. Okay, so let's just go back. In 1962, Nehru
[Guest 2]: died. Sorry, in 1962, we have the China war. In 1964, Nehru died. In 1965, we had another
[Guest 2]: war and Shastri died. In 1969, Indira Gandhi nationalized banks. In early 1971, she won
[Guest 2]: elections on the platform of Gareebi Hatao. In late 1971, we had a winning war, but one
[Guest 2]: that involved tremendous demands upon resources. And then by 74, 75, the economy was down in
[Guest 2]: the dumps and the country was burning with the various agitations all over the place.
[Guest 2]: And then we got to 1976, that was the emergency. It was just one terrible long period. I wish
[Guest 2]: to say to everybody who's gloomy in India today, that this gloomy period ran from 1962
[Guest 2]: to 1977. Okay, so 15 years of bad times happens. Okay, so you've got to rescale your fortitude
[Guest 2]: and be willing to live through bad times and bad times don't have to be short. It can be
[Guest 2]: pretty long and they can be pretty disastrous. What was going on in the minds of the elite?
[Guest 2]: And how did the elite consensus shift? It's not voters, really, who woke up and started
[Guest 2]: saying that Indian socialism is not working. It was an elite led project, where more and
[Guest 2]: more thinking people started waking up and saying, you know, this ain't working. So,
[Guest 2]: I consider one of the most important pioneers in this field to be Arun Shourie, who was
[Guest 2]: writing fundamental homegrown wisdom in the EPW about how the license permit Raj is generating
[Guest 2]: terrible incentives. It was just an observation of my own backyard, you know, all science
[Guest 2]: at its best is I turn around in my backyard and I describe the phenomena that I see. And
[Guest 2]: that was Arun Shourie by the mid 60s. There were people waking up and saying that, look
[Guest 2]: at East Asia, they are getting their act together, they're learning to export, they're getting
[Guest 2]: a kind of prosperity that we have not got in India. You don't need to be so pessimistic
[Guest 2]: about exports. That was Manmohan Singh's PhD thesis, and so on. So, the challenge to the
[Guest 2]: status quo came from people looking back at these 15 years and saying, you know, it's
[Guest 2]: broken. And clearly, we could do better than this, both based on observation of what went
[Guest 2]: wrong in India, and on the observation of other countries were faring better than India.
[Guest 2]: There was an 81 IMF program, there was a 91 IMF program. And that was very humiliating
[Guest 2]: for all the senior policymakers who took it personally, that this is my failure, that
[Guest 2]: we failed. And so, we had to go to the IMF and the World Bank with a begging bowl, and
[Guest 2]: take loans and aid in order to tide over these situations. And one last element I would add
[Guest 2]: to that was the fall of the USSR. It also changed the geopolitical configuration of
[Guest 2]: the world. So, in 1971, when Indira Gandhi went to war in Bangladesh, she made India
[Guest 2]: more cozy with the USSR than ever before, with the Friendship Treaty. And when there
[Guest 2]: was a fall of the USSR in 1989, folks like Narasimha Rao clearly understood that the
[Guest 2]: world had changed, and we needed to find a new place in this world. And this was one
[Guest 2]: more element of the understanding, not just an economic understanding. Of course, there
[Guest 2]: was an economic understanding that the great proponent of socialism had collapsed, but
[Guest 2]: also that we in India now needed to find our way in a difficult world, where we did not
[Guest 2]: have friends in the form of the USSR. And so, now what were we going to do? And it reiterated
[Guest 2]: the importance that we had to become strong economically, otherwise, there were going
[Guest 2]: to be dreadful consequences. So, I think of this as the theory of change that brought
[Guest 2]: us through the market orientation from 1977 to 1991, as opposed to the stagnation and
[Guest 2]: the mistakes of 1962 to 1977.
[Guest 1]: I would add a few more things to this, if I may. I very much agree with Ajay. I would
[Guest 1]: say that I think some of the unsung heroes of this time are some very senior bureaucrats
[Guest 1]: and technocrats, right? And these people are not necessarily like, you know, free market
[Guest 1]: people, right? A lot of the reforms for socialism came from people who were fundamentally socialist
[Guest 1]: and who said, hey, the system's not working very well, right? Industrial licensing, we
[Guest 1]: set it up with a particular goal in mind, and it's not working the way we think it should
[Guest 1]: be working. So, something needs to change for us to meet our goal. So, they saw this
[Guest 1]: huge like, sort of, it was very incongruent, you know, the means they were using and the
[Guest 1]: ends that they intended. I think that's a really important part. So, one tradition we
[Guest 1]: have lost in India is very good expert committee reports and very high quality, you know, parliamentary,
[Guest 1]: you know, bipartisan or multi-partisan standing committee reports and things like that. This
[Guest 1]: is a tradition which was, I mean, when you called a parliamentary committee, it was always
[Guest 1]: given to the best people. It was typically not a cronyist event. Now, they always had
[Guest 1]: the option of ignoring the committee report, right? So, they never tried to rig it or,
[Guest 1]: you know, the tendencies were not what they are today, which is either you don't call
[Guest 1]: the committee or you just kind of undermine it before it begins. So, I think some of those
[Guest 1]: committee reports from that time are still relevant, you know. So, that's one thing I
[Guest 1]: want to highlight, that there are some of these unsung heroes, we don't know their names.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, I mean, we know the names of, you know, for instance, like Abid Hussain
[Guest 1]: committee on like trade reforms in the early 80s or something like that. So, we know the
[Guest 1]: person who led the committee, but there were a lot of people doing good work like this.
[Guest 1]: That's one. The second is there is also a lot of historical accidents here. You know,
[Guest 1]: it's not clear to me that Indira Gandhi, I mean, she's very socialist. So, don't get
[Guest 1]: me wrong. I'm not saying that she's not socialist, but I don't think she came in with the same
[Guest 1]: commitment to socialism like say Nehru did. Okay. Her commitment to socialism is a little
[Guest 1]: bit more accidental, and it's also the consequence of a power struggle that happens within India.
[Guest 1]: So, if you look at what happened in 1966, right, India had to undergo a devaluation.
[Guest 1]: It had a very similar foreign exchange currency crisis at the time. IMF and, you know, World
[Guest 1]: Bank, basically the Washington consensus before it was even called the Washington consensus,
[Guest 1]: came up with the prescription. They said, we'll give you the loan. You need to devalue.
[Guest 1]: You need to do like, you know, this laundry list of things. But a few things happen simultaneously.
[Guest 1]: One is there were two moments of a break within the Congress party, right? And the people
[Guest 1]: who were against Indira Gandhi were the more liberal minded, reform minded politicians,
[Guest 1]: right? And she wanted to split from them because she was the one who wanted to be in power.
[Guest 1]: So, this is the split with the syndicate in Congress, right? And it just so happens that
[Guest 1]: she was against the liberal side, so she became more socialist. That's one part of it.
[Guest 1]: The second part of it is interpersonal relationships, right? Like the way the, you know, Lyndon
[Guest 1]: Johnson administration behaves by making India beg for PL480, you know, each week shipment
[Guest 1]: when India is going through a terrific shortage is going to come one at a time and it needs
[Guest 1]: to like, you need to beg and then it'll be approved as opposed to just opening arms and
[Guest 1]: giving aid to a country which is clearly struggling in, you know, a moment of crisis. Now, these
[Guest 1]: things make them very suspicious of America, once again. Now, in 66, Anne Kruger has a
[Guest 1]: great quote, it's a long one, so I'm not going to read it out. But she kind of, you know,
[Guest 1]: tries to think of a counterfactual that in 66, if India had done what IMF had suggested
[Guest 1]: and Indira Gandhi had gone the South Korea way, like where would India be today, right?
[Guest 1]: Like, look at South Korea's economy today. It's a developed country. And when South Korea
[Guest 1]: started in the 1950s, it was like equivalent to what Syria or Yemen is today, right? It
[Guest 1]: was torn by civil war. It's the third poorest economy in the world. And a matter of 15,
[Guest 1]: 20 years, they kind of just, you know, escaped out of that poverty trap. So Anne Kruger talks
[Guest 1]: about how 1966 may or could have been a moment and what if it had been that moment. So there
[Guest 1]: is a bunch of historical accidents and there is some internal churn going on by well-meaning
[Guest 1]: economists and technocrats, many of whom are actually dealing with the IMF at this time
[Guest 1]: and they recognize the kind of failures of their policy. And when you come to the 1980s,
[Guest 1]: about 10 to 12 years before the reform period that, you know, that as Ajay mentioned, there
[Guest 1]: is a series of really good reports. Okay. And the reports matter for two reasons. One,
[Guest 1]: they are coming from an elite perspective and we know the collective action problems
[Guest 1]: of voters getting together to defeat one ideology versus another ideology. I don't think the
[Guest 1]: voters have still managed to do that, you know, even 30 years after liberalization.
[Guest 1]: But the second part is these elites have buy-in within the government. They are part of the
[Guest 1]: state machinery. It's very different than Shruti Rajgopalan, Ajay Shah and Amit Verma
[Guest 1]: talking over a podcast about MRTP being bad, right? There is a difference when there is
[Guest 1]: actually a Sachar committee report on MRTP, right? And that report from the inside examines
[Guest 1]: it. They understand what is going on. They understand how to write the recommendations
[Guest 1]: in a way that they have buy-in within the community that they are involved in and how
[Guest 1]: to make these things go through. Now, of course, this happens in 1979, early 80s. MRTP doesn't,
[Guest 1]: you know, get reformed until the early 2000s. So there's a long time period. But as Ajay
[Guest 1]: said, 15 years, 20 years for these kinds of elite-led reforms is not that long a period
[Guest 1]: of time. It takes that long for ideas to come in and for them to take root and, you know,
[Guest 1]: things like that. And the third is, here I have a bit of an issue with my own community,
[Guest 1]: which is that of professional economists, right? If you think about the 70s, you know,
[Guest 1]: once the Korean miracle has happened, by the 70s, I mean, early 70s, you have Bhagwati
[Guest 1]: and Padma Desai have written their book on how industrial licensing and, you know, the
[Guest 1]: entire industrial planning system is simply not working. By the mid to late 70s, you have
[Guest 1]: TN Srinivasan, you have Jagdish Bhagwati. I mean, Jagdish Bhagwati is at MIT, TN Srinivasan
[Guest 1]: is at Yale. These are elite economists at top institutions. And when they have a position
[Guest 1]: on economic development in Asia, it matters, okay? Look at what today's development economists
[Guest 1]: are doing, right? I mean, they're very credible. They're excellent people. But today's development
[Guest 1]: economists are not talking about trade as the route to prosperity, right? Today's development
[Guest 1]: economists are tinkering social protection programs. If we tinker a little bit and pull
[Guest 1]: this liver and give a sari instead of 200 rupees or have a timestamp instead of this
[Guest 1]: other mechanism, what are we going to get, right? So there has also been a really big
[Guest 1]: problem within the elite economics community. There is a crisis where development economics
[Guest 1]: has become a field in its own. I don't even know sometimes what it means, but the engines
[Guest 1]: of growth, which is, you know, strong macro monetary policy or trade policy, these things
[Guest 1]: are now just taken for granted. It's not fashionable to work on these things anymore. I can't remember
[Guest 1]: the last time I read something new, which was not like a journal of economics perspectives piece
[Guest 1]: that was really good on free trade as the engine of growth or like endogenous growth
[Guest 1]: theory or innovation specifically applied to developing economies or sub-Saharan Africa
[Guest 1]: or something like that. That work is not existing, right? Which means the next generation of economists
[Guest 1]: who are trained are going to be doing something a little bit different. And it does matter.
[Guest 1]: And it matters not because of what Modi is going to do tomorrow, but it matters 15 years from now,
[Guest 1]: who is going to dig us out of this grave when the opportune moment comes, right? Who is that
[Guest 1]: Sachar committee report going to be written by in 2034? Those people need to exist and they need
[Guest 1]: to be trained and they need to be influenced by an economics elite. That actually depresses me
[Guest 1]: more than virtually anything else that we're seeing right now. If I may just continue on the
[Guest 2]: sociology of the economics profession, Shruti, as you know well, Jagdish Bhagwati and T. N. Srinivasan
[Guest 2]: started out at the Delhi School of Economics. And so I actually claimed them as Indian economists
[Guest 1]: and not as MIT or Yale economists. No, they're Indian economists, but they get the world stage
[Guest 1]: and they're talking about India at a global platform with a certain amount of credibility,
[Guest 1]: which really makes a difference even for the Indians listening to them. The Indians are
[Guest 1]: more likely to listen to T. N. Srinivasan and Bhagwati when they come from MIT.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I'd just like to emphasize, they picked their knowledge here out of observation of their
[Guest 2]: backyard. So it was in the great traditions, as I said earlier, that, you know, George Akerlof
[Guest 2]: went out walking from ISI Delhi and saw people selling vegetables and invented the lemons model.
[Guest 2]: And so observation is the key being immersed authentically in that reality is what gave
[Guest 2]: Jagdish Bhagwati and T. N. Srinivasan the novel insights that they had. Turning to the Indian
[Guest 2]: landscape of that period, I felt there is an interesting distinction between a Delhi community
[Guest 2]: and a Bombay community of that period. The Delhi community was very much part of Nehru's
[Guest 2]: central planning of the idea that the economists had access to some unique knowledge and the
[Guest 2]: ability to plan. So the economists cast themselves as social engineers, what might today be
[Guest 2]: fashionable for the computer technologists to call platform designers, that they will design society.
[Guest 2]: So those kinds of things were the flavor, the nature of the Delhi community. Whereas
[Guest 2]: in Bombay, it seems to me that there was a greater nurturing of an economics that A.
[Guest 2]: did not involve the key protagonists possessing any power. So they were more academic economists
[Guest 2]: rather than going and running some central planning operation or the other and being
[Guest 2]: closer to the private sector and seeing private sector dynamism and capabilities and
[Guest 2]: internationalization and so on. And it seems to me that there is a very interesting moment in 1977
[Guest 2]: where Morarji Desai became prime minister and H. M. Patel became the finance minister
[Guest 2]: and D. T. Lakdawala became the deputy chairman of the planning commission. And these three people
[Guest 2]: brought in a different ideology, a different framework. It was a lot of gnashing of teeth
[Guest 2]: and biting of nails on the part of some of the Delhi establishment because these were not
[Guest 2]: the cool kids who were spinning planning models. But then that was the point. That was how we
[Guest 2]: started bringing new ideas to bear as compared to the old establishment, which was this mixture of
[Guest 2]: poverty and redistribution and mistrust of markets and central planning.
[Guest 1]: And one last addition to this Delhi-Bombay thing, there is also a majority of the pushback is
[Guest 1]: coming from, you know, the Forum for Free Enterprise, right? I mean, Ajay mentioned Arun
[Guest 1]: Shourie. Rajaji fortnightly writes about the stupidity of price controls and the Essential
[Guest 1]: Commodities Act and like the license. He coined the term license permit raj and so on. You know,
[Guest 1]: you have people like Masani and A. D. Shroff giving lectures. So there is there is a whole
[Guest 1]: Bombay intellectual community, which is far less, you know, mistrustful of private enterprise and
[Guest 1]: far more in line with, hey, what are the engines of growth and what are the unintended consequences?
[Guest 1]: One person I want to mention here, who's like never thought of as an economist,
[Guest 1]: but I think had great writings of that time is Nani Palkiwala, right? Palkiwala is like the first
[Guest 1]: public finance, like sensible public finance thinker we have in India, because he started
[Guest 1]: out as a tax lawyer and about talking about look at what the tax code is. And he came at it from
[Guest 1]: two points of view, right, which are very valuable to the conversation we're having. One is, hey,
[Guest 1]: this simply doesn't work, right? It has all these unintended consequences. They're terrible. And the
[Guest 1]: second is the constitutional rule of law perspective, which is what kind of society can you
[Guest 1]: have if your highest tax rates are 97 percent and you're going to end up making a criminal out of
[Guest 1]: everybody because no reasonable person is going to be willing to part with 97 percent of the income
[Guest 1]: that they've earned, you know, so on and so forth. And so he comes at it from a very interesting
[Guest 1]: perspective. And Ajay is absolutely right that there is something very interesting going on in
[Guest 1]: Bombay at that time, culturally, that there is this group of people who are not just writing
[Guest 1]: about it, but they actively engage with the public, which is also something missing in Delhi,
[Guest 1]: right? Delhi people are not doing these huge public lectures and they're not really trying
[Guest 1]: to persuade people. It's a very insider game. We know how the game is played. We are technical
[Guest 1]: economists. We know how the system works and we are going to make these clever plans and talk to
[Guest 1]: each other about it at the IIC. And I think Bombay is just a fundamentally different culture
[Guest 1]: intellectually, not just in terms of ideas, but also the dissemination.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you said there's something interesting going on in Bombay. These days,
[Amit Varma]: the only interesting thing going on in Bombay is the seen and the unseen. We'll take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break now, but after which we'll talk directly about the 91 reforms. I did want to spend
[Amit Varma]: some time doing the segue from the Nehru years to the Indira years because things became much worse.
[Amit Varma]: But you've, you know, put a very interesting kind of nuance there, like one view of Indira,
[Amit Varma]: which is essentially correct, is that economically she was a complete disaster. People speak of the
[Amit Varma]: emergency, but I think a lot of what she did in terms of her economics, there were crimes on
[Amit Varma]: humanity that perpetuated poverty and suffering throughout the country. But the interesting
[Amit Varma]: nuance that you pointed out is that she wasn't a committed socialist necessarily. She went in
[Amit Varma]: that direction because of political imperatives. She had to combat the syndicate within the
[Amit Varma]: Congress Party as it were. And this was just a positioning game that she could, you know,
[Amit Varma]: position herself as apart from them using this. And it also sold well, you know,
[Amit Varma]: good intentions sell well. But at the same time, you know, it could have been reason for hope for
[Amit Varma]: some had she lived, because maybe she had no convictions, maybe she was just a sociopath
[Amit Varma]: will do whatever. Certainly her young son Sanjay was and of course, a lot of the way she behaved
[Amit Varma]: came from those incentives ki bete ko khush karna hai. But you know, so we'll go directly to 91
[Amit Varma]: after the break. But before that, I'll leave my listeners with a thought that Ajay when he was
[Amit Varma]: speaking, he mentioned he spoke about the elites of that period who were on these committees and
[Amit Varma]: who had access to, you know, to bureaucrats and to politicians and not just people sitting around
[Amit Varma]: doing a podcast. And the thought struck me that imagine if I was to try and do a podcast in that
[Amit Varma]: period, I would never get a license, right? Because first of all, the conception of my
[Amit Varma]: podcast originally was very different 20 minute episodes, a lot of experimentation brought me
[Amit Varma]: here, I would have had to apply for a license for the original conception, which would have taken
[Amit Varma]: five years to come. And the experimentation would never have happened. And there would have been
[Amit Varma]: monthly bribes I would have had to pay. The other thought I'll leave people with, which I've, you
[Amit Varma]: know, mentioned sometimes in the context of agriculture, which was a one part of our economy,
[Amit Varma]: which wasn't sort of reformed in 91, is that imagine that if writers had to go through an
[Amit Varma]: APMC, so you're a writer, but you can't sell to any publication, but you know, according to sort
[Amit Varma]: of mutual consultation that you know, this is you pay me this much, I'll give it to you for this
[Amit Varma]: much blah, blah, you can't, you have to sell it to an APMC for writers, right, maybe a WPMC,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, and they'll give you a fixed price. And then they have all the writing in front of
[Amit Varma]: them. And they sell that on to publications and so on. So it would really be the equivalent of
[Amit Varma]: you getting say 200 rupees for a piece, which they then sell on to the publication for 10,000 rupees.
[Amit Varma]: And that's exactly what's been happening in agriculture for decades. Ajay and I have a great
[Amit Varma]: episode on these recent farm laws. In fact, which is, I think one of my top 10 episodes. So
[Amit Varma]: much lucidity and insight there, as they will be in this episode also after we come back from the
[Amit Varma]: break. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you
[Amit Varma]: first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became
[Amit Varma]: somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I was shaped by it
[Amit Varma]: in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different
[Amit Varma]: things because I wrote about many different things. Well, that phase in my life ended for
[Amit Varma]: various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this
[Amit Varma]: podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox,
[Amit Varma]: you don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you. Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm
[Amit Varma]: chatting with Ajay Shah and Shruti Rajgopalan on the importance of the 91 reforms. And finally,
[Amit Varma]: after two hours of conversation and hopefully, delightful digressions, which you would have
[Amit Varma]: found as interesting as I did, we have reached 1991 or not yet. Because people I think often
[Amit Varma]: speak of 1991 as if it is this fixed moment in time where there was a quantum leap in events
[Amit Varma]: and everything just changed. But actually, there was a gradual process as both of you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: before the break, which was underway, you know what some economists have termed as liberalization
[Amit Varma]: by stealth happening through the 1980s. So tell me a little bit about that. I mean, especially,
[Amit Varma]: it's always fascinating to me to speak to you, Ajay, on all of this, because it almost seems
[Amit Varma]: like you're discussing the French Revolution with someone who was actually there when people
[Guest 1]: were getting beheaded and who knew Robespierre personally and all of that. He just called you old.
[Amit Varma]: Because I didn't call him old. He's a, he's a statesman. His co author Vijay Kelkar was
[Amit Varma]: part of some of these committees, I was just reading Rakesh Mohan's essays on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what went on behind the scenes at that time. And Mr. Kelkar was a part of that to some extent,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so Ajay, so take me through a bit of that process in the decade past. Like when we
[Amit Varma]: look back, it's easy to think of Indira as a socialist, sociopathic monster, which of course,
[Amit Varma]: she was for a significant period of time. But there is also this narrative that at a certain
[Amit Varma]: point in time in the late 70s and early 80s, even she was beginning to give in to reason and sense,
[Amit Varma]: which was coming from others, you know, and so on with Rajiv Gandhi as well. And had Rajiv
[Amit Varma]: actually lived, perhaps a liberalization would have happened anyway, because he was already
[Amit Varma]: turning towards the conclusion that we needed all of this, regardless of the crisis that
[Amit Varma]: eventually happened. So take me through the landscape. There's a really important break in
[Guest 2]: this history in 1977, where, as I mentioned, Morarji Desai, H M Patel, and DT Lakhdawala
[Guest 2]: became the three, the big three economic policy people of that period. In those days, the Deputy
[Guest 2]: Chairman Planning Commission really mattered much more than is the case today. And it was a cautious
[Guest 2]: process of liberalization. So, for example, instead of a tariff being 300%, it would be 200%.
[Guest 2]: In the early 80s, it was the concept of broadbanding of industrial licenses, where instead
[Guest 2]: of having a license to make a 20 minute podcast, they would say anybody who has a license to make
[Guest 2]: a 20 minute podcast is automatically deemed permitted to make a podcast of any length
[Guest 2]: between 10 minutes and 30 minutes. Okay, and that would be liberalization, because you suddenly got
[Guest 2]: to move in an incremental way around your ecosystem and find something that made a little more sense.
[Guest 2]: And these early steps in reform were actually successful rather quickly. If you do the
[Guest 2]: econometrics of structural breaks in GDP growth, right there in 1979-80, we get a jump to 5.5%
[Guest 2]: growth compared to the so called Hindu rate of growth of three and a half percent. So,
[Guest 2]: fairly modest changes generated a decent impact on growth fairly early. There are two big features
[Guest 2]: of that early period, which we in hindsight, would see as very different compared to what
[Guest 2]: happened after 1991. The first was that it was very domestic centric, there was not a liberalization
[Guest 2]: opening up to the outside world. So, it was like a pre-globalization phase of fixing up some of the
[Guest 2]: domestic economy. And the second big feature of that period is very little was done on finance.
[Guest 2]: It was all real sector focused, because can we get goods and services and raw materials to move a
[Guest 2]: little better? My good friend, Vivek Bhatia, who used to be in business today, tells me of the
[Guest 2]: time when he was a reporter. And in 1981, we got the decontrol of the price of steel and cement.
[Guest 2]: And there was like a funeral atmosphere in the Ministry of Steel and Ministry of Cement. Okay,
[Guest 2]: so did you know there was a Ministry of Cement or things like, I don't even remember what was
[Guest 2]: the name of the department. But this sounds trivial that there should be no government
[Guest 2]: involvement in the price of steel, there should be no government involvement in the price of cement.
[Guest 2]: But at the time, it was a big deal. It was a very big deal. It was as strange as the few
[Guest 2]: market-oriented economists in India today who get the idea that there is no role for government in
[Guest 2]: the currency market. If you try to say in India today, that the exchange rate should move based
[Guest 2]: on market forces, it would be a novel proposition for many people. In similar fashion, it might
[Guest 2]: sound obvious today, but at the time, it was a big deal. And these were important liberalizations.
[Guest 2]: I can't help tell a funny story of my family story. We moved into my present house in Bandra
[Guest 2]: East in 1972. And that was, it was a cooperative housing society where in those days, the people
[Guest 2]: who were members of the cooperative society had to do a lot of the heavy lifting to make the thing
[Guest 2]: happen. And that was an age where there were shortages of cement. So, the thing got delayed
[Guest 2]: for years and years in getting built until 1972 when we moved in. Because individuals had to just
[Guest 2]: figure out that, oh, there's a little bit of cement here, so now let's scramble over and get
[Guest 2]: that cement. And then the project would make some progress. And then again, it would grind to a halt
[Guest 2]: because there was not enough cement. So, these seem like small things, but they are a very big
[Guest 2]: deal that a government involvement in the price of cement or the price of steel is a huge distortion.
[Guest 2]: And many of these incremental things were getting done. And as Shruti emphasized a moment ago with
[Guest 2]: Nehru, there was a positive feedback process that Nehru and Mahalanobis scored a significant
[Guest 2]: acceleration of Indian growth compared with pre-colonial times. In similar fashion,
[Guest 2]: this community of the reformers gained confidence and earned respect and gained credibility because
[Guest 2]: right there after 1977, in 1979-80, there was a structural break in GDP growth and growth
[Guest 2]: accelerated to 5.5%. And so, this process was working its way through the 80s. And then we had
[Guest 2]: a terrible mess in the late 80s where many things came together. There was domestic political
[Guest 2]: difficulties that led to reckless fiscal policy, which spilled over into a large current account
[Guest 2]: deficit. And then we had oil shocks after 1979. And those things came together and generated a
[Guest 2]: balance of payments crisis at a time when the political conditions in the union government
[Guest 2]: were completely broken. So, that gave us the big messy BOP crisis. Once again, to underline what
[Guest 2]: Shruti was saying a moment ago about many people thinking about these things and rebuilding
[Guest 2]: the policy framework, it is not widely known that the Chandrasekhar government with Yashwant
[Guest 2]: Sinha as the finance minister had worked out a good chunk of a complex policy package that would
[Guest 2]: be done that looks a lot like what was finally unveiled by Narasimha Rao and Manmohan Singh.
[Guest 2]: But it didn't happen because that government collapsed. And then finally, we get to that
[Guest 2]: epochal final moment where we had the absolute genius of folks like Narasimha Rao as prime
[Guest 2]: minister, A.N. Varma in the prime minister's office, Chidambaram as commerce minister,
[Guest 2]: Manmohan Singh as finance minister, Monte Kaluwalia as finance secretary. Earlier,
[Guest 2]: he was the commerce secretary with Chidambaram and Ashok Desai as the chief economic advisor to
[Guest 2]: Manmohan Singh. And all this came together and we just got a huge jump forward. And my
[Guest 2]: important characterization of the second phase is that it was opening up to the world,
[Guest 2]: was reducing trade barriers, it was reducing capital controls, and it was commencing on
[Guest 2]: domestic financial system. So these are the two different phases of 77 to 91 as being more
[Guest 2]: domestically oriented and the 91 reforms as being more about the external sector and about finance.
[Guest 1]: I would add a few things to what Ajay said. So first, I should plug the project, right? So
[Guest 1]: some of the things that Ajay spoke about are directly about the 1991 project.
[Guest 1]: So the website is the1991project.com. There were two crises that were happening simultaneously.
[Guest 1]: So you know, Ajay is absolutely right, the structural break happens in the 80s. But one
[Guest 1]: is some of this, you know, the benefits you're getting because of broadbanding, right? Like
[Guest 1]: first you could make spoons, now you can also make forks. So of course, there's an expansion
[Guest 1]: in what you can make and there is a reallocation of goods going to slightly higher valued users.
[Guest 1]: So it's more productivity. But simultaneously, the government had gotten into all sorts of crazy
[Guest 1]: welfare spending. You know, by the 80s, the cronyist socialist state is kind of at its peak,
[Guest 1]: right? So everything you have from your, you know, loan waivers to, you know, a complete
[Guest 1]: mess that is happening with the banking system to increase in all your agricultural subsidies,
[Guest 1]: post green revolution, all this is like, you know, there's a huge fiscal burden. So while
[Guest 1]: there is growth in the 80s, I mean, we should also talk about how the deficit started to become
[Guest 1]: very large in the 80s and became a little bit unmanageable, right? So both on the books deficit
[Guest 1]: and off the books deficit. So that's number one. The second is there's always all these
[Guest 1]: global accidents that really matter, right? So we knew that there is a balance of payments
[Guest 1]: crisis brewing. It's not like they woke up one day in 1991 and they realized that it's a problem.
[Guest 1]: They knew that this is going to come and go, but they thought at least the way the bureaucrats,
[Guest 1]: many of them tell the story is that Rajiv Gandhi was supposed to be the intended reformer of India,
[Guest 1]: right? He had already brought in some technocrats. He was being advised by Jairam Ramesh and Sam
[Guest 1]: Petroda. You know, they were like very, it was very unusual because they were very young people
[Guest 1]: who were liberal minded and studied in America, as opposed to the old Nehruvian guard,
[Guest 1]: which were, which had been advising members of his family before that.
[Guest 1]: And Monte Singh Ahluwalia has talked about how he prepared a reform document, which later became
[Guest 1]: like a blueprint called the M document. But he started preparing it initially thinking that
[Guest 1]: Rajiv Gandhi is going to come to power. And there were some murmurs that Rajiv Gandhi was a little
[Guest 1]: bit more reform oriented than, than his mother and the previous prime minister. Simultaneously,
[Guest 1]: globally, the Gulf war happens, and this is where it's the balance. You know, you could have had a
[Guest 1]: fiscal deficit crisis that pushed India into reform, just happened to be a balance of payments
[Guest 1]: crisis, right? And what really ends up happening is we don't have enough foreign exchange to buy
[Guest 1]: essentials. And by the time you get to the mid nineties, right? And the late nineties, you can't
[Guest 1]: afford more than three, four weeks of oil imports because the Gulf war has made oil suddenly very
[Guest 1]: expensive, right? And you're not exporting enough to earn enough foreign exchange to buy the imports.
[Guest 1]: That is, that is, you know, in a, in a nutshell, what the balance of payments crisis is,
[Guest 1]: but people know this is coming. So there are a few things going on. You have A. N. Verma,
[Guest 1]: who is Narsimha Rao's, you know, sort of like the prime minister's office, the main guy,
[Guest 1]: but he was industry secretary before that. So he had written with Rakesh Mohan, a detailed note
[Guest 1]: on de-licensing while he was in the industry secretary, right? That work had been going on
[Guest 1]: since 1988. For instance, you had Montek, who immediately after Rajiv Gandhi died,
[Guest 1]: it just so happened that in those years, the world was a little bit less partisan, right?
[Guest 1]: So VP Singh invited Montek Aluwalia to be an advisor to his government. When VP Singh's
[Guest 1]: government suddenly lost confidence and he had to resign, the Chandrashekhar government kept
[Guest 1]: kept a lot of these old people on, right? So they were, they continued to be advised by the A. N.
[Guest 1]: Verma's and, you know, the Rakesh Mohan. So all these people, there was a lot of continuity.
[Guest 1]: So the idea that there were these three or four people who just suddenly showed up on the scene
[Guest 1]: and there was a balance of payments crisis and boy, last six weeks later, we had big bang reforms.
[Guest 1]: That's a very reductive view. These things were cooking for a long period, because if they don't
[Guest 1]: cook for a long period, you get blunders like demonetization. You know, I want to put this out
[Guest 1]: there. Demonetization is also an economic reform. It is just a very, very bad idea. And it had no
[Guest 1]: consultative process and it didn't go through the two things that Ajay has been flagging this whole
[Guest 1]: time, which is, I look in my backyard and I talk about what's happening, right? And second,
[Guest 1]: a very clean analytical framework to say, why do we have these restrictions on industries?
[Guest 1]: Why do we have 75 industries on this list? Why can't we just remove it? Right. Why do small
[Guest 1]: scale industries deserve protection? So on and so forth. So that's one part of it. And the second
[Guest 1]: part of it that I want to flag, and I think we've done a good job of this in the project. So right
[Guest 1]: now, when we launched the project, we kind of gave the series of events that I told you about,
[Guest 1]: and it eventually precipitated in India can't afford imports. The world economy has lost
[Guest 1]: confidence in India. Moody's and S&P downgrades the economy. India is literally forced to sell
[Guest 1]: its gold, which is a matter of great shame, because this is something even the public
[Guest 1]: understands, right? You only pawn your family assets when, as they say, you're at the brink
[Guest 1]: of bankruptcy. So all this stuff is going on. Two more things which are interesting here. One is
[Guest 1]: Narsimha Rao, when he was the external affairs minister with Rajiv Gandhi, has been to China,
[Guest 1]: has he's been to Singapore, he's been to Korea, right? These guys have seen the Asian miracle,
[Guest 1]: and Narsimha Rao in particular is very inspired by Deng Xiaoping, right? And China matters a lot.
[Guest 1]: So Ajay mentioned that, you know, the Berlin Wall fell, and you know, the Soviet Union is
[Guest 1]: kind of collapsing and breaking down. We already know about the South Korean miracle. But at that
[Guest 1]: point, when Ann Krueger and Bhagwati were talking about South Korea and Taiwan being these amazing
[Guest 1]: examples of growth, most of the development economists said, yeah, but they are small
[Guest 1]: countries. You can't have this for India or China. So when China sees a big difference in rates of
[Guest 1]: growth, when they start liberalizing in the late 70s, now clearly there is a template for Indians
[Guest 1]: to follow, right? And it seems like Narsimha Rao, either because he was personally enamored or
[Guest 1]: otherwise, is a big fan of this template. He wasn't able to meet Deng Xiaoping. That's an
[Guest 1]: interesting aside, but he's very inspired by it. And Manmohan Singh is quite important in this
[Guest 1]: story because he has, at that point, occupied every important office within the bureaucracy
[Guest 1]: that an economist could have occupied. He's been at the Ministry of Finance, he's been a chief
[Guest 1]: economic advisor, he's been a deputy governor at the RBI. And these things matter because they
[Guest 1]: foster trust, right? When you want to push something through in the government and you want
[Guest 1]: to do it quickly, you have to be able to pick up the phone and call five people and they're more
[Guest 1]: likely to listen to you if you worked with them before or you've established a certain amount of
[Guest 1]: credibility or people trust your economic judgment and your political savvy and they know that you
[Guest 1]: have the ear of the prime minister and so on and so forth. So I would say in this instance,
[Guest 1]: the technical skills of Manmohan Singh may have mattered less than his actual experience within
[Guest 1]: the Indian government. So one of the things we came across was we wanted to put this story together
[Guest 1]: and we came up with a list of about 20 to 22 bureaucrats and many of them, you know,
[Guest 1]: Ajay already mentioned. So it's A. N. Varma, but it's also C. Rangarajan, right? Who is at the
[Guest 1]: RBI at the time. C. Rangarajan went on later to write the balance of payments committee report
[Guest 1]: for the Reserve Bank of India, which is still, you know, it's like a textbook kind of thing
[Guest 1]: that we all studied in college, the Rangarajan committee report. So these guys are very sound
[Guest 1]: economists. They are entrenched in a system in a good way in the sense that they all know each
[Guest 1]: other. They worked with each other. They were together in a different capacity at a previous
[Guest 1]: time. They know what they are doing, which is a very large part of the reform story. I don't
[Guest 1]: think we've been able to recreate that in modern times because one, there is a lot of partisan
[Guest 1]: who belongs to which party kind of thing. Now there is a whole, you know, the prime minister
[Guest 1]: is a Gujarati, so the Gujarat kadar will be given, you know, precedence in all important
[Guest 1]: positions in the bureaucracy. So there's a lot of strange things going on. I mean, there's an
[Guest 1]: insider outsider cut depending on caste and language and state and, you know, party and
[Guest 1]: economic background, but that seemed to have not been the case in that, you know, sort of like a
[Guest 1]: golden period of reform, as we call it. And the last thing I'd say here is, though we haven't
[Guest 1]: gotten to that point in the project yet, a lot of these people continue to consult for the government
[Guest 1]: even well into the Vajpayee years. You know, all this human capital and knowledge and expertise
[Guest 1]: and connections that had been built up, they didn't just disappear, right? They were held on
[Guest 1]: as people, you know, there was a lot of continuity, which is something we don't see in government
[Guest 1]: today for a long time, right? And the people who do have continuity, we don't give them status.
[Guest 1]: So the reason, one of the reasons we put up the bios of all these people and we wanted
[Guest 1]: pictures and names and faces is people should know who C. Rangarajan is, you know, like,
[Guest 1]: like they should recognize his face. This should be a very high status individual,
[Guest 1]: right? Same with Ashok Desai. These people should be celebrated because they come with,
[Guest 1]: like, you know, even scientists, the other day I saw in the Wimbledon, they stood up and gave
[Guest 1]: a standing ovation to one of the people who was involved in the AstraZeneca vaccine, right?
[Guest 1]: Like, we've got to recognize who are the people outside the prime minister alone, like one
[Guest 1]: individual who work for 10, 15, 20 years for a very long and consistent period of time.
[Guest 1]: And they're able to nurture ideas. They're able to mentor the next generation of bureaucrats.
[Guest 1]: And therefore there is a continuity in reforms. So when I unpeel the 1991 story, the issue is not
[Guest 1]: whether July 24, 1991 is a special date and some, you know, there was a secret sauce and some magic
[Guest 1]: happened and the astrological universe aligned. That's not what it is. It is that when the moment
[Guest 1]: could align and when the window opened, all this work had already been done and all these people
[Guest 1]: were already in position to make sure that sensible ideas can actually be followed through in a
[Guest 1]: sensible way. So I think that to me is the most interesting part to add to what Ajay said.
[Guest 2]: I agree with everything Shruti has said. I have a few more aspects and illustrations of this. So I
[Guest 2]: was just thinking about Vijay Kedkar's story. He started out as economic advisor in the
[Guest 2]: Ministry of Petroleum. And so first, interestingly and surprisingly in the modern world, after
[Guest 2]: some years in the Ministry of Petroleum, starting out as an economic advisor, he became the
[Guest 2]: secretary, Ministry of Petroleum. Okay. So these days, career economists would not become the
[Guest 2]: heads of department. It just doesn't happen anymore. But it was happening in those days.
[Guest 2]: Similarly, Monte Kaluwalia was secretary commerce with Chidambaram as the minister in 1991, which
[Guest 2]: was very important to the trade liberalization which happened in that period. The second
[Guest 2]: interesting thing is Vijay Kedkar got six full years as secretary, which is something that is
[Guest 2]: just unheard of these days. And in those six years, he basically got that entire pipeline done
[Guest 2]: of opening up to private sector participation in oil exploration, in oil extraction, in refining,
[Guest 2]: all the way to retail, which I think got a bit messed up. But six years is the kind of time
[Guest 2]: horizon. And note, this is on top of many years spent in the ministry as the economic advisor.
[Guest 2]: So earlier, he was the advisor to people like Lavraj Kumar, who were there. When Lavraj Kumar
[Guest 2]: left, he blessed and anointed his successor. So again, it was a different age that a person like
[Guest 2]: that was given the continuity of going on from being economic advisor to secretary and then got
[Guest 2]: six years as secretary. And it's a big important change that the petroleum industry is one of the
[Guest 2]: most important industries from the overall economy. And piece by piece, that kind of
[Guest 2]: detailed technical attention was required in many, many parts of the ecosystem.
[Guest 2]: Second story, I just want to tell at a more personal level. I was hired by Yashwant Sinha
[Guest 2]: and Rakesh Mohan at the Department of Economic Affairs. And a short while later, Jaswant Singh
[Guest 2]: became finance minister. And with him S. Narayan was the finance secretary and K. L. Kaur came in
[Guest 2]: as advisor to the minister. And after that, there were the elections and Chidambaram became the
[Guest 2]: minister. It never occurred to me that I was partisan, because I truly wasn't. I was just a
[Guest 2]: technician. I was just used to solving technical puzzles and intellectual problems. It never
[Guest 2]: occurred to me that I had one side of the ideological spectrum or the other. There was a
[Guest 2]: whole world, there was a culture of experts and expertise and people worked with government period,
[Guest 2]: it didn't matter who you were. So as an example, when Monte Kaluwalia finished up as finance
[Guest 2]: secretary, he went to the planning commission, Vijay Kelkar replaced him. He came from being
[Guest 2]: minister of petroleum, he became finance secretary at the Department of Economic Affairs. There was
[Guest 2]: no fuss about these things. It didn't matter that are you with this government or that government.
[Guest 2]: And then Kelkar went to the IMF as the director. And when Vajpayee was prime minister and Jaswant
[Guest 2]: Singh was finance minister, Kelkar came back as advisor to the minister at the North Block. There
[Guest 2]: was no fuss about all these things. And has it changed today?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, today, all the features I described, you won't find career experts becoming secretaries,
[Guest 2]: you won't find long tenures. So a younger person getting six years as secretary,
[Guest 2]: I can't recall the last time it happened. And you don't find people spanning across governments.
[Guest 2]: Today, you have to wear your loyalty on your sleeve on Twitter, then it becomes awkward.
[Guest 1]: I mean, there are a lot of problems with the permanent executive and the way we have these
[Guest 1]: bureaucratic appointments, and they're virtually lifelong tenure and things like that, right?
[Guest 1]: I know all the problems with it. It's like a whole Yes Minister comedy in itself, right?
[Guest 1]: But the single advantage of it is you can have continuity across government,
[Guest 1]: right? And you can have people who can see through reforms past the point of like political
[Guest 1]: opportunism and things like that. So it seems to me like we've taken the worst of every world,
[Guest 1]: and we have made sure that the one benefit there is of this kind of, you know, permanent executive
[Guest 1]: also goes away because the partisan politics has also been brought into that. The second is there,
[Guest 1]: I mean, seniority was always important, and all these things were always important.
[Guest 1]: But people did recognize someone of merit, and more importantly, someone of technical expertise.
[Guest 1]: Right? So you did recognize that when Mohan Singh has a PhD in economics, and he has taught,
[Guest 1]: and he is an expert in trade or, you know, something else, and therefore he should be
[Guest 1]: this particular deputy governor at RBI, he should do this particular role at the finance ministry
[Guest 1]: and so on, and, you know, kind of circulate. I feel like that has also disappeared now.
[Guest 1]: Now it's more like, I need my guy to be at the environmental ministry because I need my guy to
[Guest 1]: make sure that my files can move forward. And now multiply that across the Ministry of Finance and
[Guest 1]: Commerce and Industry and everything else. So some of the second stage downstream problems of
[Guest 1]: License Raj have also crept into this, you know, unintended part of how we treat the bureaucracy.
[Guest 1]: You need your guy there because otherwise, things get stuck and there's no way to move them.
[Guest 1]: But if you put your guy there, you're not always going to have expertise and expertise,
[Guest 1]: you're not going to have expertise and loyalty. That's a very rare thing to get.
[Guest 1]: And you might even get it in one person, you're not going to get it across the board.
[Guest 1]: Right? So that's, I think, really, really important. It's also the same with judges.
[Guest 1]: When was the last time you got a Supreme Court Chief Justice who had a tenure longer than,
[Guest 1]: you know, a year, year and a half? Supreme Court Justice, the standard tenure is a couple of years,
[Guest 1]: less than two years, right? So this is not just a bureaucracy thing. This plague is everywhere
[Amit Varma]: inside the government. No, and a great example of this plague of loyalty, as it were, is what
[Amit Varma]: happened after demonetization, where every economist either associated with the government
[Amit Varma]: or who had otherwise supported it were essentially told that right in support of it. Of course,
[Amit Varma]: the three of us all wrote opposing demonetization from day one. But there are so many people who
[Amit Varma]: definitely knew better, who actually wrote in support of demonetization, even though they knew
[Amit Varma]: it was a disaster, because they had to stay on the good books of the government. And there are
[Amit Varma]: incidents which reveal something about a person's expertise and competence. And there are incidents
[Amit Varma]: which reveal something about their character. And I think a lot of that happened around that time
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, people who we would otherwise think of as fine thinkers, you realize that the
[Amit Varma]: scholarship might be good, but they're deficient in character, when you know, they don't sort of
[Guest 2]: vote with their conscience, as it were. I want to tell a character story. I had started writing a
[Guest 2]: column in the Business Standard. Many years ago, Ashok Desai moved out of the Ministry of Finance
[Guest 2]: and joined the Business Standard. And he got me going, writing a column in the Business Standard.
[Guest 2]: And there was some situation where I had written something very critical of something that the
[Guest 2]: DEA had done. And that day or the next day, I bumped into Monte Carlo. And I said, I kind of
[Guest 2]: apologetically said, I hope you're okay with the fact that I really disagree with what you've done.
[Guest 2]: And I wrote harsh words, criticizing you in the newspaper. He said, you know, on this subject,
[Guest 2]: I agree with you completely. And he said, I am not monolithic. I am one creature out of a complex
[Guest 2]: machine called the Ministry of Finance. Very often, I might advocate something internally,
[Guest 2]: and I might lose. And the outcome that comes out is something that I may not agree with.
[Guest 2]: And I might secretly applaud when you write something in the newspaper attacking the
[Guest 2]: Ministry of Finance. He says, you should never worry about offending me when you write in the
[Guest 2]: newspaper. And that was so great. It really gave me comfort. It gave me confidence. Similarly,
[Guest 2]: I remember the times when I was at NIPFP, and we were explicitly funded by the Ministry of Finance.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, fortnight after fortnight, I used to be writing stuff in the newspaper about all
[Guest 2]: the things being done wrong by the government. And it was just, it was never a problem. It was
[Guest 2]: an age when knowledge mattered, when arguments mattered, when criticisms mattered.
[Guest 2]: The people at the top were secure enough to understand that this is the part of the process
[Guest 2]: of how we fix things, that it is important to solve problems, and criticism is an integral
[Guest 2]: part of that. My last funny story is that prior to the 2004 general elections, the Lok Sabha elections,
[Guest 2]: there was a debate between Jaswant Singh and the shadow finance minister, namely Manmohan Singh,
[Guest 2]: on TV. Okay, so imagine it, it was a more evolved India, where these things could happen. And Jaswant
[Guest 2]: Singh was taken aback when Manmohan Singh said that there is a problem with interest rate exposure
[Guest 2]: of banks in India. And it's not just me saying it, one of your own economic advisors has written a
[Guest 2]: paper. There's this guy called Ajay Shah who has written a paper, which has demonstrated that
[Guest 2]: the banks are facing a lot of difficulties, and you will potentially have a banking crisis
[Guest 2]: because of the currency mismatch in the banks. And Jaswant Singh came back home and said,
[Guest 2]: who is this guy, Ajay Shah, and I want his head on a platter. And it all boiled down to basically,
[Guest 2]: him being explained that I've worked on this thing inside the Ministry of Finance forever.
[Guest 2]: I have always been talking and worrying and writing and writing articles about these problems,
[Guest 2]: and I wrote a research paper, and this is perfectly okay. And I have been part of the
[Guest 2]: constructive process as an employee in the Ministry of Finance of trying to fix this.
[Guest 2]: And at the end, it was okay, there was absolutely no friction.
[Guest 1]: Also, I think I want to add one more layer to this. So, you know, one, of course,
[Guest 1]: now it's all about tribal loyalties and things like that. But even on the tribal loyalty point,
[Guest 1]: the other day, I think this was Devesh Kapoor who said this. He said, look at what has happened
[Guest 1]: during COVID. All your so-called liberal elites and foreigners, you know, and this is really
[Guest 1]: this is really people like me in particular, right, who are constantly criticizing the Modi
[Guest 1]: government and all of that. We are also the biggest advocates that the Biden administration
[Guest 1]: should help India and send vaccines and, you know, reduce the restrictions and make sure that exports
[Guest 1]: can go so that India can manufacture more vaccines. So loyalty to a party or an individual is quite
[Guest 1]: different than loyalty to the country or the cause. So here it's not that those times, you know,
[Guest 1]: loyalty didn't matter. It is that the loyalty wasn't to an individual, right? This loyalty
[Guest 1]: to an individual is a Narendra Modi and Indira Gandhi playbook. Okay. It is not a Nehru-Vajpayee
[Guest 1]: playbook. It's not even a partisan thing. It's there are certain individuals who are demanding
[Guest 1]: these very high degrees of, you know, loyalty, which which are frankly very counterproductive
[Guest 1]: to the overall enterprise of governance. So I just want to flag that out there that they
[Guest 1]: expected loyalty from Ajay even before. It just wasn't to tow the party line or the individual line.
[Amit Varma]: So before we get to the reforms themselves, which I think it's about time we do, but before we get
[Amit Varma]: to the reforms, one final sort of meta question about the stuff happening behind the scenes,
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, on one hand, what you suddenly see in 91 is a lot of people who weren't really
[Amit Varma]: speaking out before, at least in the public discourse about the necessity for reforms,
[Amit Varma]: suddenly coming out very strongly in favor of it. Like, you know, Manmohan in his 91 budget
[Amit Varma]: speech famously saying no power on earth can stop an idea whose time has come. You know,
[Amit Varma]: Rakesh Mohan in India transformed describes how Manmohan had a meeting with all his bureaucrats
[Amit Varma]: and secretaries as the reforms were being planned. And he told them, quote, if any of you have any
[Amit Varma]: difficulty with the proposed reform program, we can find other things for you to do, stop code,
[Amit Varma]: which is an act of great conviction. And there are various things that Manmohan, Chidambaram,
[Amit Varma]: Jayaram Ramesh all said during this period, which showed that conviction. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: the pace of change after these reforms is a little bit slow. And there is a lot of opposition
[Amit Varma]: that they face internally, like Rakesh Mohan describes this cabinet meeting where their
[Amit Varma]: initial note about the reforms, which they were planning to bring about in July 24, 91,
[Amit Varma]: it met with opposition from within the cabinet, where people like ML Forte Dhar and Arjun Singh
[Amit Varma]: were like, no, this is against everything Nehru and Indira stood for and you're turning your back
[Amit Varma]: against our great heritage of the Congress Party and blah, blah, blah, and all this shit happened.
[Amit Varma]: And what Mohan describes is that, you know, the framers of that document got to work
[Amit Varma]: and adroitly they changed a lot of wording to say things like in continuation with Nehru's
[Amit Varma]: concern for our economy and Indira Gandhi's love for the poor. And so they changed the political
[Amit Varma]: messaging. But substantively, everything remained the same. And it kind of went through. Now,
[Amit Varma]: this brings in mind that earlier phrase about the liberalization by stealth of the 1980s,
[Amit Varma]: was that stealth necessary? Was this just a bunch of elites who fortuitously happened to think along
[Amit Varma]: the same lines in the 80s and 90s, but they were fighting an establishment which didn't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: agree, they were fighting inertia, they were fighting institutions and individuals who had
[Amit Varma]: entirely different incentives. And therefore did that kind of complicate the whole process,
[Amit Varma]: because what we then saw is we had that burst of liberalization in 91. We had some more under
[Amit Varma]: Vajpayee perhaps, but there was a lot of liberalization that didn't happen. A lot of
[Amit Varma]: reforms that I'm sure Manmohan and Chidambaram would agree made a lot of sense, but that never
[Amit Varma]: happened at all. So what is that? What is that internal fight? Is there an internal narrative
[Amit Varma]: battle within the state as well, which you know, has to be fought? So, you know, if you look at
[Guest 1]: history, there has never been a situation where within a party, everyone agrees on everything,
[Guest 1]: right? I mean, when we talked about the 1947, 1950 moment, right? Congress is like this umbrella
[Guest 1]: party, but it has people like GB Panth, who are really, you know, closer to today's, you know,
[Guest 1]: UP BJP faction. And, and you also have on the other extreme, like, you know, people like Nehru,
[Guest 1]: right? There is always going to be the need for a particular kind of leadership,
[Guest 1]: which is willing to take along people within the party and people in the opposition.
[Guest 1]: Okay, the idea that you can have democratic politics without that, and everyone magically
[Guest 1]: agrees upon the same idea at the same time, and everyone's willing to give up their entrenched
[Guest 1]: interest. I mean, this is a pipe dream. So the question is always, who are these leaders who
[Guest 1]: are able to make this happen? So we, we talked a brief moment ago about how Yashwant Sinha,
[Guest 1]: you know, I think a few weeks ago, he said that he had almost the identical speech as Manmohan
[Guest 1]: Singh, because you know, the blueprint of the reforms was ready, but he didn't have a prime
[Guest 1]: minister who could push things through, right? One of the first few things that Narasimha Rao
[Guest 1]: and Manmohan Singh do as a team is they talk to people within their party, and they talk to people
[Guest 1]: outside the party. So Narasimha Rao calls this famous meeting of all opposition parties, right?
[Guest 1]: And says, look, the country is in deep crisis, the only way to get out of the balance of payment
[Guest 1]: situation crisis is to devalue, and then immediately after that announced trade and
[Guest 1]: industrial reforms, because otherwise, you can't capitalize on the devaluation, like it's just not
[Guest 1]: going to matter. In the midst of this, Manmohan Singh is tasked with keeping the internal bureaucracy,
[Guest 1]: you know, the troops in check, right? That's why the famous Rakesh Mohan thing of, you know,
[Guest 1]: making sure that all the secretaries are not going to create problems and things like that.
[Guest 1]: And you do have to tell the old guard, now imagine, everyone who's in the system has
[Guest 1]: gotten a certain amount of status and clout by being in the directorate of technical,
[Guest 1]: whatever, right? The people who are in the cement department, giving you the cement permits,
[Guest 1]: and you know, the commerce department, these people have clout for a particular reason,
[Guest 1]: you're basically telling them that everything they've devoted their life to for the last 10
[Guest 1]: years is complete bunkum, and we're going to take it away and what you did had no purpose.
[Guest 1]: And not only did it have no purpose, you also impoverished the country and led to a balance
[Guest 1]: of payments crisis. Now, you can't like make these people disappear, right? You got to take
[Guest 1]: them along in some way. So what is that way? So sometimes you got to plead with them like,
[Guest 1]: you know, Narasimha Rao did with opposition parties. Sometimes you negotiate with them.
[Guest 1]: And sometimes you just plain tell them like Manmohan Singh, you better get in line or you,
[Guest 1]: you know, fall by the wayside. So it was a combination of all of these things. And I
[Guest 1]: don't think it's unique to 1991. This needs to happen every time there is reform. And it is
[Guest 1]: any reform. So either you do this secretly with no consultative process and do it by ordinance,
[Guest 1]: the way Indira Gandhi nationalizes banks or Narendra Modi does demonetization,
[Guest 1]: or you do this the proper way. And the proper way incidentally takes time, right? So the 91
[Guest 1]: reforms are also very unique in that in the beginning of July 91, you have two rounds of
[Guest 1]: devaluation. Two, three days after that, you have a huge change in trade policy that's announced.
[Guest 1]: Two weeks after that, you have complete industrial de-licensing. This has never happened before,
[Guest 1]: right? And that pace of reforms is almost impossible to sustain, right? So the expectation
[Guest 1]: that that's the pace at which it would have happened. And in five years, we've completely
[Guest 1]: dismantled 50 years of socialism. That is also unlikely. So I think the question is not why did
[Guest 1]: they not continue the reforms or what stopped? I think what people, at least I'm trying to
[Guest 1]: understand, and I've also learned this from the way Ajay writes about these things is
[Guest 1]: try and understand what is the institutional magic, which is missing in present day,
[Guest 1]: right? Which is not able to mimic the speed or the quality or the substance of the reforms that
[Guest 1]: happened in those years, right? So that I think is the more valuable way that I would pose the
[Guest 1]: question. I don't have any optimal timeline for how these reforms should happen to actually say
[Guest 1]: that 10 years is too soon or two months is too late. You know what I mean?
[Guest 2]: I find it useful to think about the categorization of first generation reforms versus second
[Guest 2]: generation reforms. First generation reforms are like a stroke of the pen, where you just get the
[Guest 2]: state out of the way. And that's entirely good and appropriate. And if anything was not done
[Guest 2]: enough, or we need to think and strategize how to do more of it. I want to talk about
[Guest 2]: customs duties as an example. I thought one of the most brilliant milestones in India's history
[Guest 2]: was when Yashwant Sinha pre-announced that every year, the peak customs rate will go down by 5%.
[Guest 2]: Now, that's just pitch perfect. That's the right way to do these things. Because well ahead of time,
[Guest 2]: you are reshaping the structure of everybody's expectations. Every firm starts going back into
[Guest 2]: their spreadsheets and thinking one year out, this is the change in raw material price. This is the
[Guest 2]: change in my foreign competitors. And what am I going to do? Either I bail out or I match the
[Guest 2]: productivity and the pricing of my foreign imported rivals. So over a multi-year period, the firms were
[Guest 2]: given that credible warning that look, this is coming. It's coming with probability one. It was
[Guest 2]: very costly to fight with people up front and say this is happening. You fight as much as you want.
[Guest 2]: Sorry, this is going to happen. And as you know, there would be parts of the very BJP that were
[Guest 2]: inimical to this kind of project. But in the end, it just worked magically. And that's the
[Guest 2]: it just worked magically because it actually ignited investment by firms as opposed to a large
[Guest 2]: big trade reform that just throws firms into disarray and messes up the investment plans of a
[Guest 2]: lot of people. So even better than doing a good trade reform is doing a phased but yet completely
[Guest 2]: credible and predictable trade reform. And the magic of that age was that the announcement by
[Guest 2]: the Ministry of Finance that every single year, the tariff is going to be cut by 5%. That statement
[Guest 2]: actually had credibility, which is again, a very difficult currency to achieve. It's a comment on
[Guest 2]: those people and that community that they were able to make statements that over the next five
[Guest 2]: years, this is what we're going to do. And the whole private sector believed them. It would be
[Guest 2]: very difficult to do those kinds of things today that any statements made about a future date
[Guest 2]: are always up for doubt, because everything is so discretionary. So when you are tactical and
[Guest 2]: expedient and tactical and expedient, then you stand for nothing. So it is important to stand
[Guest 2]: for a coherent philosophy. And big speeches about philosophy matter because they generate credibility
[Guest 2]: about these kinds of forward-looking designs. So this is an example where it was very important
[Guest 2]: to make a pre-announced stroke of the pen reform. I find it interesting to compare and contrast
[Guest 2]: with the more complex reforms of actually building state capacity, that there is a
[Guest 2]: constructive problem. So imagine you're going to build a regulator like CEPI, or you're going to
[Guest 2]: rebuild an organization like RBI. That is much more difficult. And I think by and large,
[Guest 2]: that community did not know how to do that. So with all due respect to them,
[Guest 2]: they are my friends. They are my elders. I love those people. I admire those people.
[Guest 2]: But roughly speaking, I think that a certain amount of decontrol got done, and that was great.
[Guest 2]: But the machinery of how to think public administration, how to draft laws, how to get
[Guest 2]: checks and balances, so that in a public choice world, you will get to better functioning state
[Guest 2]: agencies, that process just didn't begin in that period. And so in a way, we've got a partial
[Guest 2]: delivery of stroke of the pen reform. But alongside that, we've got a Kafkaesque state
[Guest 2]: that is creeping every day in terms of clawing back freedom and grabbing power. So I want to
[Guest 2]: tell one little story as an example of what goes wrong in that first-generation reform approach
[Guest 2]: of stroke of the pen. So the economists of that period wanted to announce that we will now have
[Guest 2]: current account convertibility, which means that for you and I to import or export goods, there'll
[Guest 2]: be nothing. There'll be absolutely no friction. And they wanted to begin a process towards
[Guest 2]: capital account convertibility. Certainly, they wanted to decriminalize capital account
[Guest 2]: violations, that it should be seen as economic law. There's no need to send a man to jail for
[Guest 2]: having dollar bills in the pocket, which is the way it was earlier. So these are announcements.
[Guest 2]: If you ask any economist in India, they will say, yeah, India has current account convertibility.
[Guest 2]: Well, Bhargavi Zaveri and I are writing an article about the legal minefield that is there on the
[Guest 2]: current account. It is not true that India has current account convertibility in the sense of
[Guest 2]: unencumbered movement of goods and money across the border on the current account. For example,
[Guest 2]: sometimes you will see you go to amazon.in and you try to buy goods and the merchant happens to be
[Guest 2]: abroad. Amazon will say, give me KYC. Can you imagine that? For doing a cross-border transaction,
[Guest 2]: they want your identity. One of the very high levels of privacy that you don't want a government
[Guest 2]: organization to know that such and such name and person purchased such and such goods. But there
[Guest 2]: is that breach of privacy that happens to demand your identity if you dare to buy goods from a
[Guest 2]: foreign source. And that's because we didn't actually do current account convertibility.
[Guest 2]: We just did a bunch of hacks here and there. We didn't get a clear framework
[Guest 2]: of getting rid of all these restrictions. Similarly, on the capital account. So the old
[Guest 2]: FERA, which was created by Indira Gandhi in 1973, was the rules about capital controls.
[Guest 2]: And the owner and manager of the capital control system, the Reserve Bank of India,
[Guest 2]: was given the job of drafting the 1999 law, which I will always say should be concerning
[Guest 2]: because the incumbent that owns the system of controls is never going to really decontrol.
[Guest 2]: And in the constitution of India, it is said that freedom is the default and state coercion to limit
[Guest 2]: your behavior is the exception. Well, the very first sentence of FEMA says all transactions
[Guest 2]: are forbidden unless we permit it. And we will show you the method through which we will give
[Guest 2]: you some narrow windows of permission. But by default, everything is back. And it was...
[Unknown]: FEMA is the improvement.
[Guest 2]: FEMA is the improvement because it was said that, oh, this is so nice because we've removed
[Guest 2]: criminal penalties. So this is supposed to be the improved law. Well, sure enough, some years later,
[Guest 2]: criminal aspects to FEMA violations are back in the law. So we are actually back to a world of
[Guest 2]: criminalized violations of capital controls and a Kafkaesque system of capital controls,
[Guest 2]: and not even completely done current account liberalization. And what do I fault the great
[Guest 2]: reformers for? For not being able to think institutionally, for not being able to read
[Guest 2]: laws, for not being able to analyze law, for not thinking it through and actually executing
[Guest 2]: on simple aspects, which at the time could have gone through, but there was a very simplistic
[Guest 2]: economist thing that, of course, current account transactions should be completely open. Okay,
[Guest 2]: let's do it. I pushed out some notification while the entire machinery of control was alive and
[Guest 2]: well. I want to compare and contrast, for example, when Thatcher's people were doing the capital
[Guest 2]: account decontrol of the UK. At that time, they correctly understood that it's not just the capital
[Guest 2]: controls that have to go, also the reporting and monitoring requirements have to go. Because if the
[Guest 2]: entire machinery of reporting and monitoring is there, then at the stroke of a pen tomorrow,
[Guest 2]: somebody will bring back the controls. So not only did they destroy the capital controls at
[Guest 2]: a deep legal level, they also removed the machinery of monitoring and reporting. That is freedom.
[Guest 2]: Freedom is where you and I can do whatever we want, without needing to discuss or report with
[Guest 2]: a sarkari guy. And you don't really see that in the environment of the 1904. So I think that's an
[Guest 2]: important insight into what got done and what didn't get done. A certain incomplete version
[Guest 2]: of stroke of the pen stuff got done. The state capacity building, the refashioning the Indian
[Guest 2]: state to actually produce public goods and do the things that we need the state to do
[Guest 2]: didn't really happen. We kind of started trying to build a SEBI, but we didn't really make progress
[Guest 1]: on building high quality government organization. I would add just one thing to this, which is,
[Guest 1]: so for exactly what Ajay was saying, we managed to do it for industrial de-licensing, right?
[Guest 1]: So not only did we manage to, you know, remove licensing on stroke of the pen for almost all,
[Guest 1]: except I think there was a handful of industries, 12 or 18 industries, which were still
[Guest 1]: under licensing. But the more important part is this HR department issue, right? Which is everyone
[Guest 1]: who was supposed to be in the directorate of this and controller of that now needed another job.
[Guest 1]: Right? These people's jobs had to be taken away and they had to be refitted somewhere in the
[Guest 1]: regulatory state, away from the command and control state. So we managed to do that with
[Guest 1]: a certain degree of success with industrial controls. And Ajay is absolutely right. We
[Guest 1]: never did it with capital controls and we never, we partially did it with trade and customs and
[Guest 1]: tariffs, but never completely did it with that either. But I have, I think an even bigger grouse
[Guest 1]: than Ajay, even on the first generation reforms, which is, we managed to do the first generation
[Guest 1]: reforms, stroke of the pen in very few sectors of the economy. Right? So we managed to get basically,
[Guest 1]: you know, I mean, instead of producing spoons, you can produce spoons and forks, which was the
[Guest 1]: broadbanding. Then we said, okay, you can expand. Then we said we can import steel. But now if you
[Guest 1]: need to produce steel at home to make spoons and forks, you cannot assemble the factors of
[Guest 1]: production in India. Right? We never had the stroke of the pen reforms. I mean, we're talking
[Guest 1]: about capital, which is, which is what I just been talking about all this while, but what about
[Guest 1]: labor and land? Right? These are your two most important factors of production, which are
[Guest 1]: virtually impossible to pull together without solving the labor and land problem. You're only
[Guest 1]: going to get tech startups and software, like, you know, two people in an apartment in Bangalore
[Guest 1]: kind of growth. You're never going to get like Bangladesh kind of, you know, you know,
[Guest 1]: Bangladesh kind of, we have lots and lots of factories, which make lots of cheap t-shirts
[Guest 1]: or cheap spoons or Nike shoes or shoelaces. That stroke of the pen first generation reform is still
[Guest 1]: missing 30 years later. So I think there is another aspect of that. So, you know, there are
[Guest 1]: two kinds of unfinished business. One unfinished business is what we started. We never quite saw
[Guest 1]: through, which is actually propping up a sensible regulatory state. And the second is we never quite
[Guest 1]: removed the permit raj, what I call permit raj, but you know, Ajay still thinks of license plus
[Guest 1]: permit raj in all these other factors of production. And that is where all your choke
[Guest 1]: holes and bottlenecks are today in the Indian economy. We cannot put up a plant in India.
[Amit Varma]: It is impossible. And so many examples come to mind of that. Like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: there was a story last year, I think about how it is easier to legally get a gun in Delhi than to
[Amit Varma]: open a business. And, you know, I remember reading a few years back that the Four Seasons Hotel
[Amit Varma]: took two years longer than they expected to open up in Mumbai, because they had to apply for 165
[Amit Varma]: licenses, including separate licenses for the weighing scales in the kitchen and in the bedrooms.
[Amit Varma]: So it's just kind of out of whack. Let's go on to the actual reforms itself of 91. You know,
[Amit Varma]: if one is to explain to a layperson, what are these reforms? Why did they help? Why are they
[Amit Varma]: so transformative? And I'll come back to the criticisms later, because I feel we should also
[Amit Varma]: address that. And not just give hosannas, but also address the criticisms, which I am keen to do,
[Amit Varma]: because I think they all have valid counters. But first, to begin with, let's sum up what the
[Amit Varma]: reforms essentially were and what they did. We've mentioned bits of it in piecemeal ways that
[Amit Varma]: anybody can buy and sell a phone, you know, anybody can start an airline, though obviously,
[Amit Varma]: barriers to entry are different there are high there anyway. But you know, but those are little
[Amit Varma]: things we've discussed in passing, if you had to sort of look at it, I was about to say from the
[Amit Varma]: top down, but if you had to sort of talk about the reforms in a more systematic way, how would
[Guest 1]: you explain their importance? I would put them in three categories, right? One is industrial policy,
[Guest 1]: one is trade policy, and one is, you know, currency controls, right? So these are three
[Guest 1]: main things. So if you just take July 1991, three major things happened. One is there was devaluing
[Guest 1]: of currency, and then a further commitment in later years, which, you know, came up with a
[Guest 1]: whole bunch of other committee reports and other parallel reforms, that India would not be this
[Guest 1]: artificially pegged, overvalued currency, it would be more in line with what the value of the rupee
[Guest 1]: is globally. So that's number one, and that's really important. Second, the restrictions on
[Guest 1]: people's ability to hold even a very reasonable amount of foreign exchange, those restrictions
[Guest 1]: would go away, right? And the third, initially, those people were criminalized, right? So if you
[Guest 1]: held $200, instead of your allocated $80, Fera would literally put you in jail without any kind
[Guest 1]: of due process, like you would go straight to jail, right? It's kind of really freaky. A lot
[Guest 1]: of the smugglers that you see in Indian movies from the 70s, you mentioned Shashi Kapoor and
[Guest 1]: Amitabh Bachchan, so that that's where this is coming from. What are they smuggling? You know,
[Guest 1]: those smugglers are not smuggling drugs. If you notice those movies, those movies are quite
[Guest 1]: sanitized. It's like Nike shoes, Walkman, you know, gold bars, VHS recorders, those are the
[Guest 1]: sorts of things that they are smuggling, right? And they're smuggling because two parts. One is
[Guest 1]: there is trade controls on what you can and cannot import. And second, there are these currency
[Guest 1]: controls on how you pay for what you import. So one part of it is currency controls, right? This
[Guest 1]: gets reformed. On part of trade controls, there are two aspects to it. One is the tariffs, okay?
[Guest 1]: And the tariffs are mainly for imports, right? So now, just to give some background on where this
[Guest 1]: is coming from, whenever you have a closed economic system and you say resources are
[Guest 1]: very scarce and we can only use our precious foreign exchange for very specific imports,
[Guest 1]: like we can't just waste all this willy-nilly on Nike shoes and Walkman, right? Like we need
[Guest 1]: to import steel or whatever. Now, what ends up happening is twofold. You can do this through
[Guest 1]: currency controls, but you also do it by having very, very high tariffs for imports such that
[Guest 1]: they discourage imports, right? So even though there are only two cars in the market, which is
[Guest 1]: your Fiat-Premier partnership and your Ambassador, and if I want to get a different car because I've
[Guest 1]: been waiting in line too long, I can't easily get a car, right? Why? Because the import duties on
[Guest 1]: cars, depending on whether they're basic cars or luxury cars, is anywhere between like 180% to
[Guest 1]: 350%, right? This is the import duty in addition to the value of the car, which means you will do
[Guest 1]: two things. You will one, protect the domestic industry of cars so that, you know, there is
[Guest 1]: a dedicated demand for Ambassadors and Fiats, even though they're not such great cars.
[Guest 1]: And second, you won't allow people to waste precious foreign exchange by, you know, wasting
[Guest 1]: it on cars and instead use it, you know, for government to bring in steel or oil or whatever
[Guest 1]: it is. That system started getting rationalized. So it didn't completely go away. But I believe the
[Guest 1]: average tariffs were about 115% and the highest tariff band was like 355% or something, like just
[Guest 1]: outrageous numbers that make no sense. So one is that started getting adjusted downwards, right?
[Guest 1]: So what is the list? How much can you import? And what is the tariff you need to pay for imports?
[Guest 1]: That process started. Very, very important. Now, the reason this is useful in line with
[Guest 1]: devaluation is when you devalue your currency, your exports technically become more competitive.
[Guest 1]: On paper, right? But for your exports to become more competitive, you have to actually produce
[Guest 1]: stuff that other people want to buy. And if you want to actually produce things that other people
[Guest 1]: want to buy, you have to be able to import high quality inputs that you require to produce them.
[Guest 1]: This is like Narayan Murthy going, you know, 25 times to Delhi to get a good mainframe computer
[Guest 1]: without which she can't export tech services, right? So this is a really important part.
[Guest 1]: So any economy, like right now, there's this big rhetoric in India on make in India.
[Guest 1]: We want to not import stuff in. We only want to export stuff. Any economy where exports are a
[Guest 1]: high percentage of the GDP, imports will be a high percentage of the GDP. Because even economies
[Guest 1]: that specialize in, say, steel, you're going to be exporting different kinds of steel and you're
[Guest 1]: going to be importing different kinds of steel because you're that specialized. So this is
[Guest 1]: something important to keep in mind. So that process of rationalizing how we trade and
[Guest 1]: exchange with the rest of the world, that process began. The third part is industrial
[Guest 1]: de-licensing. I think this has been the most successful element of the 1991 reforms.
[Guest 1]: Industrial de-licensing is basically, you know, what we talked about, right? Like your podcast
[Guest 1]: needing a license. And if you go from 20 minutes to 40 minutes, you need an expansion permit,
[Guest 1]: right? If you need to import a mic, your blue Yeti mic, then you need to go to another controller
[Guest 1]: to get the foreign exchange permit and then go to the customs officer to get.
[Guest 1]: So none of these controls were mutually exclusive. You had to get every one of them to actually be
[Guest 1]: able to, you know, conduct whatever enterprise you wanted to. That system started getting
[Guest 1]: rationalized. OK, so one, they removed all these control systems, right? You could set up a firm
[Guest 1]: without requiring government permission and any restriction on this is like a, you know,
[Guest 1]: 10,000 crore project. I mean, those numbers were a lot smaller then, but, you know,
[Guest 1]: 100 crore project or whatever. And then it also brings in the Monopoly Control Act,
[Guest 1]: or we're going to put it on a separate list. Those kinds of very problematic things started
[Guest 1]: getting streamlined. But the most important thing is overnight, from the default of every industry
[Guest 1]: needs a permit, you went to no industry needs a permit except these 18 industries. I think that
[Guest 1]: was the most exceptional reform that happened in July 1991. The reason this matters is,
[Guest 1]: if you want to engage with the rest of the world and start trading, if you think about it,
[Guest 1]: industrial licensing is like an import tariff is a tax on foreign producers, right? So I am
[Guest 1]: penalizing a foreigner from selling to me domestically. But an industrial licensing
[Guest 1]: system is a tax on domestic producers. Domestic producers can now no longer produce or, you know,
[Guest 1]: need to keep paying bribes and things like that to be able to produce enough to export.
[Guest 1]: So that domestic taxation system kind of lifted overnight, not completely,
[Guest 1]: but in a very meaningful way that immediately opened up things. Now, the follow up reform
[Guest 1]: that started in July, but kind of took a little while is they said that foreign investment is
[Guest 1]: no longer a bad thing, right? So that was the other thing. So this is where people like A.N.
[Guest 1]: Verma and all are very, very important because you can de-license industry overnight by the
[Guest 1]: stroke of a pen, right? But to make sure that foreign manufacturers, whether it is Pepsi or
[Guest 1]: General Motors or whoever, actually come into the country and are willing to set up plant and are
[Guest 1]: willing to engage with you, that requires a fair bit of government maneuvering, starting with very
[Guest 1]: credible signaling of, we are open for business. And they did that very well. So they had like a
[Guest 1]: foreign investment board, which was set up under the Prime Minister's office. And A.N. Verma was
[Guest 1]: like the coordinating person for that. So these were the things that kind of happened immediately
[Guest 1]: in a period of one month. Now, a lot more happened, you know, before and after that,
[Guest 1]: but this would be my quick summary of it. And I should point out here that to my
[Amit Varma]: listeners that A.N. Verma is not a relative of mine. He is another Verma. And as for import
[Amit Varma]: tariffs being sort of attacks on foreign producers, there are also attacks on domestic consumers.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's a scene in the unseen right there, but that's a whole new story. What did
[Amit Varma]: we not do? Because it seems here that people might well ask that, oh, you say we've, you know,
[Amit Varma]: dismantled the license and permit Raj, but there's still so much bureaucracy all around us. For
[Amit Varma]: example, I did an episode with our mutual friend, Madhu Menon, long, long back on restaurant
[Amit Varma]: regulations. And he pointed out that, you know, when he ran a restaurant, he had to apply for,
[Amit Varma]: I think, some 40 licenses a month or whatever. So there was one regulation that he could only have
[Amit Varma]: one entry into his restaurant, only one door. And I think that was from the excise people because
[Amit Varma]: they wanted to regulate the flow of alcohol. So only one door and the fire safety regulation said
[Amit Varma]: you have to have multiple doors. So the point is, it doesn't matter what he does. He's breaking the
[Amit Varma]: law. It doesn't matter which of those two laws he's breaking. He's paying a bribe anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So we have tons of those also. They're a little bit different. I mean,
[Guest 1]: this is union government trying to centrally control who does business where and how they
[Guest 1]: do their business, which is obviously much easier to reform overnight by the union government,
[Guest 1]: right? Versus a lot of land use and, you know, this kind of, you know, restaurant regulation or
[Guest 1]: school licensing regulation, which tends to be usually at the local level and sometimes at the
[Guest 1]: state level. Right. So I think there is a fundamental difference between the two,
[Guest 1]: the kind of distortionary, like, you know, this is a list of essential commodities,
[Guest 1]: and now I'm no longer going to control the price of sugar, which I shouldn't have centrally
[Guest 1]: controlled in the first place. But should I want to decontrol that? It's a stroke of a pen
[Guest 1]: versus, you know, 500 different districts imposing their own specific small distortionary permit
[Guest 1]: systems that they have. I think those are fundamentally different things. I don't think
[Guest 1]: the 91 reforms were even aiming towards that. I mean, ideologically and as an economic vision,
[Guest 1]: they would have agreed with it. But I don't think they were aiming towards fixing this kind of
[Guest 1]: restaurant regulation, nor could they have done it. It was just completely beyond their purview.
[Guest 1]: You know, that is a certain some of it is not even legislation. Some of it is delegated
[Guest 1]: legislation. Right. There'll be like a restaurants management or in safety act, for instance. Right.
[Guest 1]: And then the devil is in the details. Right. There will be like this one thing that says
[Guest 1]: power to make rules. OK. And they've delegated the power to make rules to the local executive
[Guest 1]: authority. And now those guys are making rules willy nilly, you know, which is completely bizarre
[Guest 1]: and absurd, which is, you know, you need one, you need a single point of egress or you need two
[Guest 1]: points of egress, you know, so on and so forth. So I don't think that could have been done by this
[Guest 1]: kind of reform. And it frankly can't be done by Modi either. It just needs to be committed at the
[Amit Varma]: local level. Rent seeking Zindabad. But the larger question I was getting at is what are the
[Amit Varma]: kind of reforms that we didn't do and which, you know, still need to be done in a continuation of
[Amit Varma]: the same spirit, like land, labor, blah, blah, blah. Ajay. So, as I said a short while ago,
[Guest 2]: there is a stroke of the pen problem, which is just get out of the way. I feel a lot more needs
[Guest 2]: to be done. There is a highly inappropriate interference by the Indian state in the affairs
[Guest 2]: of everyday people. You know, there are consenting adults doing things and there is no role for the
[Guest 2]: state to interfere. And there is a large class of impediments that are on the books or on the laws
[Guest 2]: as of today. And then part two is the state capacity problem where there are things that
[Guest 2]: will inevitably be done by states. And it could be financial regulation. It could be
[Guest 2]: land title systems. It would be a taxation system and so on. And we did not begin understanding how
[Guest 2]: to run a tax administration system. So, you know, for some time there was a period where the tax
[Guest 2]: rates were coming down and tax laws were becoming a little insane. And the tax administration was
[Guest 2]: never really fixed. We didn't build a high quality law to govern the checks and balances of how tax
[Guest 2]: administrators behave. So, there is a whole lot of discretion in the hands of tax administrators.
[Guest 2]: And then it depends on the character of the leadership. So, depending on how the leadership
[Guest 2]: changes, the demands made upon these agencies can change. And that's a very dangerous place to be
[Guest 2]: as a society. So, the checks and balances upon agencies, officers need to be coded into laws,
[Guest 2]: not just left to good sense. Because the first lesson we know in politics is that you can't count
[Guest 2]: on good sense emerging out of a liberal democratic system of elections.
[Amit Varma]: So, if we look at the consequences of the reforms, you know, what are the metrics by which
[Amit Varma]: we can say that, you know, these reforms work? Like, obviously, there are literally hundreds of
[Amit Varma]: millions of people lifted out of poverty. Like Nitin Pai once pointed out that with every 1%
[Amit Varma]: rise in the GDP, 2 million people come out of poverty. I think he subsequently revised that
[Amit Varma]: figure to say that it's more, which tells you the enormous power of this. 3 million people,
[Amit Varma]: Shruti points out, lifting three fingers, which is absolutely phenomenal. At the same time,
[Amit Varma]: you have critics saying that, oh, there is greater inequality, to which my point is that
[Amit Varma]: inequality and poverty are very different things. That if you think they are the same thing,
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking in a zero sum way that, oh, if the rich are getting richer, the poor must be
[Amit Varma]: getting poorer. But actually, everybody can sort of become richer at the same time, though,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, the rich will become richer by more. My metric is poverty. It's Mahatma Gandhi's
[Amit Varma]: metric. How will this policy affect the poor? That's the first question that I always ask and
[Amit Varma]: poverty has gone down massively. There's again, no disputing that. Has inequality increased? Yes,
[Amit Varma]: inequality has increased at the same time as poverty has gone down. I don't see that as a
[Amit Varma]: problem. It's the absolute numbers like, you know, Harry Frankfurt has a great book called On
[Amit Varma]: Inequality, where he coined this term, the doctrine of sufficiency, where he said that we should
[Amit Varma]: measure human progress by how many people achieve what he called a sufficient level to stay alive,
[Amit Varma]: which is again attacking poverty. Like one question I often ask when it comes to inequality
[Amit Varma]: is in which of these two countries would you rather be poor, Bangladesh or the USA? And
[Amit Varma]: obviously, you'd rather be poor in the USA, but the USA has far greater levels of inequality
[Amit Varma]: than Bangladesh does. So I think inequality is really something that more advanced societies
[Amit Varma]: can afford to worry about. But for us, our core problem is poverty and liberalization
[Guest 1]: made a massive dent to that. What do you guys have to say? I agree. I mean, economic growth
[Guest 1]: rates increased. We have very robust evidence that since late 80s, say 1988 onwards, you know,
[Guest 1]: the kind of growth that took place. And from 1992, until say, you know, continuously for the next 20
[Guest 1]: to 25 years, you have had consistently high growth rates on average, and it has lifted people out of
[Guest 1]: poverty. The numbers you can quibble depending on when you start and finish, but the rough number
[Guest 1]: people have come to agree upon is about a quarter of a billion people, 250 to 270 million people.
[Guest 1]: The interesting thing is, it's not just this abstract thing. Every single socioeconomic group,
[Guest 1]: the levels of income have increased. Every single socioeconomic group, right? So this is women,
[Guest 1]: this is Dalits, this is minority religions, right? Muslims. This is across regions, even the poorest
[Guest 1]: districts, the levels have increased, the richest districts, the levels have increased. So that is
[Guest 1]: something I want to put out there, because I think there's some massive confusion on this issue of
[Guest 1]: like poverty going away. This is across groups. And the evidence on this is very robust. And some
[Guest 1]: of the work on this is like Amartya Lahiri has done work on this. You know, Paul Novosad has
[Guest 1]: done work on this with Sam Asher. If you want to look at very specific, like sort of qualitative
[Guest 1]: evidence, you have Chandrabhan Prasad, who has talked about how Dalits have specifically benefited
[Guest 1]: from liberalization and how like the Dalit entrepreneurial movement really took off and,
[Guest 1]: you know, so on and so forth. And there's also upward social mobility in virtually every socioeconomic
[Guest 1]: group. So that's one thing I want to put out there. I'll tell you the margins on which the
[Guest 1]: inequality part bothers me. OK, just regular wage inequality increasing, you're right. It's not the
[Guest 1]: greatest priority for India or Indians, and that doesn't matter to me. For me, the kind of inequality
[Guest 1]: which is very problematic is the crony capitalist inequality we are seeing today. You still need so
[Guest 1]: many permits to start a business, right? Or you need this army of lawyers to escape the taxman.
[Guest 1]: Otherwise, you know, the tax authority, the discretionary crap and wiretaps and raids is
[Guest 1]: just going to the full force of the state is going to be upon you. So only rich people or people who
[Guest 1]: are privileged can afford all that. Right. So the main means to economic growth is that regular folks
[Guest 1]: can partake in greater, you know, in the gains from trade, from greater economic activity.
[Guest 1]: Right. And if the barriers to entry are so high that regular folks cannot enter that and only
[Guest 1]: people who are from business families or really big businesses and, you know, your Adani's and
[Guest 1]: Ambani's and Tata's can get into it, then we are in very, very big trouble long term. That kind of
[Guest 1]: inequality really bothers me. So the second kind of inequality that kind of really bothers me
[Guest 1]: is the barriers of access to entry when it comes to business. Right. So for economic growth to lift
[Guest 1]: people out of poverty, we need regular people to be able to partake in the gains from trade,
[Guest 1]: from what's happening in the economy, in this liberalized economy. And if you are going to
[Guest 1]: bring lots and lots of permits and barriers and not only permits and barriers, but like the entire
[Guest 1]: rule book where the state and its coercion comes crashing down on you in terms of taxation and GST
[Guest 1]: and wiretaps and raids, then you are in trouble because it means that regular people cannot enter
[Guest 1]: the zone of private enterprise and make money off of it. And only privileged people, you know,
[Guest 1]: kids from business families or even large business houses are the only people who can, you know,
[Guest 1]: partake in this kind of economic activity and actually make money. That kind of inequality
[Guest 1]: really bothers me. The other thing which I have worried about a lot during the pandemic is
[Guest 1]: when we say we lifted 270 million people out of poverty, it's not like overnight they became rich.
[Guest 1]: It's that, you know, we've eliminated some extreme levels of poverty. We've increased
[Guest 1]: the number of job opportunities and so on. But what we've realized during the pandemic is you
[Guest 1]: have this kind of lockdown or your city stopped functioning or, you know, the top 20 percent of
[Guest 1]: income earners who are responsible for the, you know, top 45 to 50 percent of consumer spending,
[Guest 1]: they stopped spending money. And now everything has come to a grinding halt and all these people
[Guest 1]: have slipped back into poverty. I believe about 60 to 70 million people have slipped back into
[Guest 1]: some kind of poverty over nine, 10 months of sustained, you know, lack of employment and,
[Guest 1]: you know, lack of social protection and so on. I think on those margins, some attention does need
[Guest 1]: to be paid to how we think about inequality, how we think about barriers to entry and any system
[Guest 1]: where a very small group of elite people are responsible for consumption and like kind of
[Guest 1]: act as the engines of growth in the economy is not very sustainable. Right. And we've sort of
[Amit Varma]: seen that through the pandemic. Yeah, it's fascinating. And both the kinds of inequality
[Amit Varma]: you speak of are actually inequalities that I agree are problematic and that are a result of
[Amit Varma]: not enough reforms of liberalization, really not going far enough. And, you know, it's still
[Amit Varma]: treating sort of citizens as subjects. Only some are privileged subjects. You know, some
[Amit Varma]: pigs are more equal than others, as the case may be. And even when we speak of rich people
[Amit Varma]: benefiting, one of the trends that we've seen in the last few years is rich people actually
[Amit Varma]: leaving the country en masse, which tells you that there is still a lot of work to be done.
[Guest 2]: So I have a perspective on this problem. I think that every business has a certain fixed cost
[Guest 2]: of lawyers and accountants and political protection. And the fixed cost is so high
[Guest 2]: in the modern environment of ever more harsh rules and criminal clauses and electronic surveillance
[Guest 2]: and dystopian data world that you've got to literally be hundreds of crore to pay for that
[Guest 2]: minimum bar of protection. So conceptually, what has happened is that there was an older,
[Guest 2]: kinder, gentler India where it was meaningful to be a one crore business, a five crore business,
[Guest 2]: a 10 crore business. It's become harder and harder to do that because the machinery of the state is
[Guest 2]: now deeply in the claws of each firm. And then there is a fixed cost of protection. So you've
[Guest 2]: got to be a certain size, then you can pay for that protection. Or it's like a Chinese Communist
[Guest 2]: Party situation that you've got to co-opt the ruling party and get that protection. But beyond
[Guest 2]: that, you've got to be very big to pay for those fixed costs. So there's a hollowing out of the
[Guest 2]: middle. And that also links to the phenomenon of the rich leaving. Because if you are in the zone
[Guest 2]: of, you know, running a hundred crore business, then you might feel that I'm better off doing
[Amit Varma]: this in London. Fair point. Shruti, my next question is to you. And it's about something
[Amit Varma]: interesting you pointed out, which gives me an opportunity to talk about what might be a
[Amit Varma]: distinction that people need to make. Where at one point in your fabulous opening essay of the
[Amit Varma]: 1991 project, you write, quote, since 1991, the union government revenue has increased 25 times
[Amit Varma]: and state government revenue has increased 28 times in nominal terms and about four times in
[Amit Varma]: real terms. Embracing markets allowed the Indian government to increase its welfare spending,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And many people who make simplistic arguments of market versus state,
[Amit Varma]: just assume that you are sort of talking about, you know, one extreme, that if you want markets
[Amit Varma]: to flourish, you don't want the state at all. Whereas my point as far as the Indian state has
[Amit Varma]: been concerned is that listen, the Indian state can carry out whatever welfare activities it wants
[Amit Varma]: to just get out of the way of private enterprise, just let private enterprise function. And the
[Amit Varma]: figures that you came up with seems to indicate that the two can happen together, that the welfare
[Amit Varma]: state will actually be a better funded, and therefore, hopefully, you know, a more inclusive
[Amit Varma]: welfare state, if there is growth in the economy, if private enterprises are allowed to flourish,
[Guest 1]: because that's where the money comes from. So, you know, this is fundamental Adam Smith
[Guest 1]: kind of business, right? I mean, the size of your pie has to grow. Otherwise, what you're
[Guest 1]: going to get into is if the pie doesn't grow, and you keep talking about how we split it and
[Guest 1]: redistribute it, there are going to be more and more people who spend a lot of money, you know,
[Guest 1]: classic rent seeking literature on how to redistribute this pie. And the smaller the pie,
[Guest 1]: or the less the pie grows, the more conflict you're going to have in society on how we split
[Guest 1]: this pie, right? If the pie keeps growing, right? Yes, it's true that every group may not get the
[Guest 1]: exact same share of the pie may not always get the you know, may not always partake in the same way
[Guest 1]: in the gains from trade, but everyone will benefit. So that's number one. The second is,
[Guest 1]: I think it's very important, the kinds of things that Ajay and I have talked about so far,
[Guest 1]: we're talking about some fundamental structural changes in the economy, right? And structural
[Guest 1]: changes in the economy are never painless. I mean, they're painful at the highest levels of
[Guest 1]: privilege to the lowest levels of, you know, privilege. So you can be the controller of
[Guest 1]: cement or sugar prices, and the next day, suddenly your position goes away, and you don't have a job
[Guest 1]: anymore. And of course, your job is secure, but you have to do something else, which is not as
[Guest 1]: status, high status or powerful. Or you could be a poor guy who just loses his job, because now
[Guest 1]: there's a pandemic or something else has happened, or now there are no more STD boots, you know,
[Guest 1]: for instance, with the telecom revolution. So if you were someone who was running an STD booth,
[Guest 1]: now you suddenly find yourself out of a job, or you're someone who's a typist.
[Guest 1]: We do need to think when we are people who are talking about large structural changes in society,
[Guest 1]: we do genuinely need to think about how do we manage the structural change socially?
[Guest 1]: What do we do when firms go bankrupt? What do we do when entire sectors become
[Guest 1]: obsolete or irrelevant? What happens when masses of people come out of agriculture
[Guest 1]: and move to cities with no social protection whatsoever? So of course, in the longer run,
[Guest 1]: we need to make sure that our cities are well equipped with jobs and housing and everything.
[Guest 1]: But in the very short run, what are we supposed to do with these people? And these are hundreds
[Guest 1]: of millions of people, it's not a small number. When I say that Nehru didn't make investments in
[Guest 1]: health and primary education, and we need a massive investment, that's going to cost money.
[Guest 1]: If you're going to spend in a big way on health in India, post pandemic,
[Guest 1]: 2-3% of the GDP, that's money that the government simply doesn't have.
[Guest 1]: So in some sense, everybody, whether you're a statist or not a statist,
[Guest 1]: has to have a commitment to economic growth, right? You want to have good measures to
[Guest 1]: battle climate change, right? Or you want to do greater amounts of mining, it doesn't matter,
[Guest 1]: you could be on ideological ends of every spectrum, but on whatever you are, greater
[Guest 1]: economic growth is probably going to be able to make one or both possible, right? So that
[Guest 1]: is something I want to put out there. We genuinely lack a commitment to economic growth in India,
[Guest 1]: it's become very partisan and tribal. The opportunity cost is just enormous. I mean,
[Guest 1]: the whole every, you know, 1% increase in GDP per capita lives 3 million people out of poverty,
[Guest 1]: you know, per year and so on. So in about 10 to 15 years, you can eliminate extreme poverty in
[Guest 1]: India, right? So the opportunity cost of not conducting reforms of not creating the kind of
[Guest 1]: institutional infrastructure that you need for economic growth in India, is that you are now
[Guest 1]: leaving behind 2-300 million people in extreme poverty that you could have avoided. So this is
[Guest 1]: something that is, it's so difficult to explain to ordinary people who are not economists,
[Guest 1]: what is at stake? Because what is at stake is invisible, right? Those people were poor before
[Guest 1]: they continue to be poor. So people don't realize that there was an opportunity to actually lift
[Guest 1]: them out of poverty. So I think that is the big thing when we talk about any kinds of reforms.
[Guest 1]: Everything else is detail, right? And even Ajay and I disagree on a lot of these things. If Ajay
[Guest 1]: and I sat down to talk about bankruptcy or SEBI, I'm sure we would like have lots of different
[Guest 1]: ideas. But the commitment remains that economic growth is the base idea on which everything else
[Guest 1]: must follow. And if you don't have a commitment to economic growth and increasing the size of the pie,
[Guest 1]: which by the way, can only be done by greater trade, division of labor and specialization,
[Guest 1]: right? That's the fundamentals. If you don't have that, if you don't get rid of permits and
[Guest 1]: institutions, which will allow for greater trade and the size of the pie to grow, if that commitment
[Guest 1]: is missing, India is just in deep trouble. And that commitment is missing. And we are in deep
[Guest 1]: trouble. Sorry, I'm just very upset about this. I have a twist on what Shruti just said,
[Guest 2]: which is the same idea, but it's worth reinforcing from a slightly different angle.
[Guest 2]: In the field of public finance, there is a lot of discussion around the tax GDP ratio.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so everybody universally believes that higher tax GDP ratios are better.
[Guest 2]: Okay, Ila Patnaik has a bracing insight on this subject. She says, suppose you had
[Guest 2]: 14 rupees of taxation on a 100 rupee GDP versus 14 rupees of taxation on a 200 GDP,
[Guest 2]: i.e. that the tax GDP ratio went down by half. The second case is Pareto superior to the first case.
[Guest 2]: In the second case, the people had 200 rupees of GDP, okay, and the state had only 14. So,
[Guest 2]: 14,100 versus 14,200. 14,200 is always better. It is a very twisted kind of
[Guest 2]: development-ish discourse to think that the tax GDP ratio should be always raised.
[Guest 2]: And in fact, there are many, many, many aspects in which tax policy and tax administration today
[Guest 2]: are designed in a hostile way, in a way that favors the arbitrary power of tax inspectors
[Guest 2]: and officials, and that precisely expresses this kind of tension, that you're better off
[Guest 2]: letting it go. You're better off letting a private economy thrive and staying at 14
[Guest 2]: rupees of government revenue. If GDP will go from 100 to 200, we should be delighted,
[Guest 2]: we should be exuberant. So, we shouldn't obsess on the tax GDP ratio, we should obsess on GDP,
[Guest 2]: the greatest good of economics is to get GDP up. And arguably, in a large part of the Indian state
[Guest 2]: today, the way forward is to get the tax GDP down, not up.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's, again, a fantastic point. And, you know, it's this sort of reflexive acceptance of
[Amit Varma]: a metric without even really thinking about it. You know, whenever somebody speaks about tax
[Amit Varma]: collections of the government going up, I'm like, why is that a good thing? You have more
[Amit Varma]: money in the hands of the predatory state instead of in the hands of the people where I would
[Amit Varma]: rather have it. But that's a separate point. You weren't really making that and I completely agree
[Amit Varma]: with both of you that economic growth is the thing and the way to get there is through economic
[Amit Varma]: freedom. And the point is, people miss the humanitarian consequences. Like I have tremendous
[Amit Varma]: anger for the policies of the past and the policymakers of the past in past decades,
[Amit Varma]: which kept people poor for decades, literally. And that's an unseen effect. You don't see that
[Amit Varma]: if you're poor today, you don't see the counterfactual of how things might have been
[Amit Varma]: had things spanned out differently, which is why it's not about numbers. People think of GDP. Oh,
[Amit Varma]: it's a number, a percent or percent. It has a real human cost on real human lives. And that's
[Amit Varma]: something we need to consider. We're kind of running out of time. So I'll end with a final
[Amit Varma]: question for both of you that, you know, we can look at the 1991 reforms either as a beacon of
[Amit Varma]: hope that it lifted a quarter of a billion people out of poverty, which itself just for that
[Amit Varma]: humanitarian reason is incredible. It empowered so many people with all the knock on effects of
[Amit Varma]: that. Or we can look at everything that has happened since and that has happened in our
[Amit Varma]: politics and the fact that the momentum has slowed and all of that as a cautionary tale,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you can see the events of the past 25 years in both these ways. And you know,
[Amit Varma]: one view would be that, hey, okay, 91 was a good moment, but look at what's happened since and we
[Amit Varma]: are sliding backwards. Another way of looking at it could be that there was a process, there was
[Amit Varma]: a movement towards freedom, the arc of history was bending one way, and we've got to work for that to
[Amit Varma]: continue. So, you know, are you more hopeful or more despairing when you look at what might lie
[Guest 2]: ahead of us, say in the next 15 years? I feel that the most important thing that changed
[Guest 2]: out of the outcomes of 1991 to 2011 is that there was a certain despondence and pessimism
[Guest 2]: about India. So, you know, we had a fabulous freedom movement. It was really a historic
[Guest 2]: moment in India's history in terms of the decency and the moral qualities of the people who led the
[Guest 2]: freedom movement. And then after that, while there was a bit of a spurt in Nehru's years of GDP
[Guest 2]: growth, it didn't work out great after that. And then we had this long period 1962 to 77,
[Guest 2]: which was truly gloomy. Standing in 1977, the Indian elite had run out of the skip in its step.
[Guest 2]: So, this was no longer the country of Gandhiji and Nehru and Ramanujan and Tagore. This was the
[Guest 2]: country that was battered and bruised and starting to question itself that, is there something wrong
[Guest 2]: with us? You know, so that's why the biting phrase, the Hindu rate of growth, that is there something
[Guest 2]: about being Hindu that messes with us and that damages our ability to do well and to be as great
[Guest 2]: and as cool a country as anything else that the world can do. I'm thrilled to bits that the 1991
[Guest 2]: to 2011 period proves that we in India have the creativity, the energy, the intellectual capacity,
[Guest 2]: the emotional capacity to really do amazing things. The kind of things that got done in
[Guest 2]: India in that period, I think have forever settled that question that there is nothing wrong here.
[Guest 2]: There's nothing wrong with us. We are every bit as good as anybody else in the world. And we just
[Guest 2]: got to get our shift together. So, yes, we've had a difficult time after that. And we need to
[Guest 2]: work hard on figuring out how to put this engine back on the road. But I feel it was just one of
[Guest 2]: the most important episodes in India's history. And it pours concrete on the idea of India.
[Guest 2]: It teaches us that the basic machinery of the idea of India can be made to work
[Guest 2]: and it can deliver growth and prosperity and decency.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I mean, I of course agree with everything Ajay said. I would say what gives me hope is
[Guest 1]: one, of course, India fundamentally changed. But to me, the hopeful thing is it gives power back to
[Guest 1]: the people, right? There is something very basic and happy about that. The idea that my grandmother
[Guest 1]: doesn't have to separate like, you know, kankar from rice, right? Or, you know, anybody who wishes
[Guest 1]: to get a CD of Pink Floyd, you know, should they be able to afford one? All these sound like first
[Guest 1]: world problems. But you can imagine this at every level, right? Like a schoolgirl wanting to get
[Guest 1]: like a schoolgirl wanting to buy a bicycle, right? Or her father wanting to make his own bicycle and
[Guest 1]: sell it or repair it. These are just things that are magical to me, okay? That this transformation
[Guest 1]: happened, that regular folks just had so much more control over what they wore, what they bought,
[Guest 1]: what they sold, how they consumed, right? That they could buy a packet of atta or sugar in a
[Guest 1]: shop without being worried about it, right? Or they didn't have to stand in line for hours to get
[Guest 1]: milk to feed their baby. These are things that one should not take for granted, given that not
[Guest 1]: too long ago in Indian history, these were just not things that were possible. And they were not
[Guest 1]: possible for a very long time and people were very despondent. So that gives me great hope that,
[Guest 1]: you know, imagine if we managed to conduct land reforms and agricultural reforms and labor reforms,
[Guest 1]: like the sky's the limit on when you give people control back over their economic choice and
[Guest 1]: destinies. That I think is a very hopeful message. There are two things that make me very despondent.
[Guest 1]: One is just the missed opportunity that we talked about. Every year that we kind of linger on and
[Guest 1]: hang around and have these petty conversations about partisan politics and don't make these
[Guest 1]: big bang, you know, economic changes happen is longer that people kind of, you know,
[Guest 1]: hang around in poverty and lose life. And they live a few years too less and women don't get
[Guest 1]: educated as much. And, you know, people drown in floods. I mean, it's everything, right? Economic
[Guest 1]: growth and prosperity change everything. But the thing that makes me really despair is for a 1991
[Guest 1]: movement to happen 15 years from today. Where are the Rangarajans and the Montakes and the
[Guest 1]: Vaidehi Reddys and the Ashok Desais in government today? Where are they? Which university are they
[Guest 1]: studying in? Which multilateral or think tank or NGO are they at? What are they writing? What are
[Guest 1]: they reading? Who are they talking to? The kind of political illiberalism we have both in India
[Guest 1]: and globally, right? That I find extremely worrying about what are the kind of ideas that are going to
[Guest 1]: emerge for 15 years from today to have a great reform movement, right? So that I think it just
[Guest 1]: worries me no end. I don't see that pipeline. Maybe I'm just not seeing it because I'm in a
[Guest 1]: different position and I don't live in India and I'm not actively talking to young people and maybe
[Guest 1]: there's some guerrilla movement where they're learning ideas through Amit Verma's podcasts and
[Guest 1]: study groups and circles and you know how people used to read Solzhenitsyn's Xerox copy in during
[Guest 1]: the high mighty days of the Soviet Union. I don't know if there's something like that going on in
[Guest 1]: India that I'm just not privy to, but I don't see it happening in technical economics and I don't
[Guest 1]: see it happening in formal institutions. That worries me and makes me despair no end, right?
[Guest 1]: So I think that's what I would say about the 91 reform movement. Oh, and please see our project.
[Guest 1]: That's the other thing I would say. What makes me hopeful is for the next one year, we're going to
[Guest 1]: have lots of great papers and essays and data to enlighten everybody on all these small details.
[Guest 1]: I have a fantastic team, two very young people who are in the right part of the pipeline. This is
[Guest 1]: Shreyas Narla and Prakhar Mishra. They have an excellent essay on how the reforms actually took
[Guest 1]: place. You know, we've put in all the bios of these people. I have a lead essay that you mentioned
[Guest 1]: Amit and generously quoted from, but we have a lot more coming from people like Ajay Shah. So watch
[Guest 1]: out and you know, hopefully all of us as a community can learn a lot from the 1991 movement
[Guest 1]: and really revive the discussion on what kinds of reforms India needs moving forward.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm flattered. You should, you know, bring up Solzhenitsyn and talk about me in the same
[Amit Varma]: breath because great, great writer, but he did spend many years in prison. So I hope I don't
[Amit Varma]: quite go down that road. You know, it was great chatting with both of you. I think sometimes we
[Amit Varma]: need to look at the past with this passionate eye and you know, not take things for granted,
[Amit Varma]: as you said, to be able to see the possibilities of the future. And, you know, thank you so much
[Amit Varma]: for coming on the show and sharing your insights and for building the 1991 project. Thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to the1991project.com. You can follow
[Amit Varma]: Shruti on Twitter at srajgopalan. You can follow Ajay at ajay underscore Shah. And you can follow
[Amit Varma]: me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at seenunseen.in. Thank you for listening.